VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting|ABR-PROM provides value added reseller (VAR) security solutions and IT outsourcing to customers in Poland. 
Data Encryption, Email Security|Absio provides a data security solution that allows organizations and private users to securely store and share email messages and data externally, while maintaining control of its use. 
Endpoint Security, Data Leakage Prevention, GDPR Compliance|Absolute Software provides persistent endpoint security and management solutions for computers, portable devices, and data. 
Intrusion Detection, Prevention|Acalvio uses virtualization to create a deceptive network for Advanced Threat Detection. Acalvio's patented solution, ShadowPlex is focused at Timely Detection, High Precision Detection and Cost Effective Detection. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance, Managed Security|Accenture provides global professional services, consulting, and outsourced services, including cyber security. 
Secure File Sharing|Accellion supports secure cloud-based mobile file sharing and collaboration for teams and enterprise organizations. 
Digital Forensics, Incident Response|AccessData provides a suite data forensics products and services for cyber security and related purposes including eDiscovery. 
VAR Security Solutions|AccessIT provides IT security and infrastructure solutions for customers through VAR partnerships with major technology providers. 
VAR Security Solutions|Accunet provides a range of value added security solutions to complement its storage, network, risk, virtualization, and mobility offerings 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|ACL provides products and services focused on governance, risk, and compliance (GRC), enterprise compliance monitoring, and data analysis. 
Penetration Testing, Security Consulting|ACROS Security is a Slovenian provider of penetration testing and related information security, application assessment, and research services. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Active Risk is one of the first ERM solution provider to drive business performance by increasing an organization’s risk-bearing capacity. Where others turn risk management into an overly complex task, the Active Risk approach is built on a six-step process that reduces complexity and builds value. 
Security Recruiting|Acumin provides executive search and technical recruiting services for cyber security positions. 
Vulnerability Management, Web Security|Acunetix provides a Web security scanner that focuses on detection of well-known and advanced exploitable vulnerabilities in Web applications. 
Mobile Security|AdaptiveMobile provides carrier-grade mobile security threat detection, security intelligence, and security suite tools. 
Web Application Firewall, Security Consulting, Cyber Security|Ad Novum provides security engineering and development services, as well as offering security products such as the Nevis reverse proxy and WAF. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|Advent IM provides knowledge-based holistic information and physical security consulting and training services for enterprise customers in the UK. 
Security R&D|Adventium solves hard problems in cyber security research and development (R&D) with emphasis on automated reasoning. 
Identity and Access Management|Aegis Identity, now merged with Code Rebel, provides identity and access management solutions focused on the needs of the education marketplace. 
Hardware/Embedded Security, Voice Security|Ultra Electronics AEP provides a range of security products and hardware security modules (HSMs) for data and voice protection using encryption and other means. 
Email Security, Brand Protection, Infrastructure Security|Agari enables businesses, including banks and social media networks, to secure their enterprise and customers from advanced email phishing attacks. 
VAR Security Solutions|Aggeios provides managed IT infrastructure and related VAR security services to enterprise customers in the Middle East. 
Password/Privilege Management, Data Encryption|AgileBits provides a range of security applications for password protection and file encryption. 
Anti-Malware Tools|AhnLab provides anti-virus and related security products for small, medium, and large enterprise customers, as well as consumers. 
Mobile Security, PKI Solutions, Security Consulting|Ahope provides mobile security and network related products as well as consulting. 
Information Assurance|Airbus Defence and Space includes a communication, intelligence, and security division, which provides cyber security/information assurance-related services. 
DDOS Security, Infrastructure Security, Web Application|Akamai provides content distribution networking (CDN), DDOS, and related security solutions for Internet-based web and application hosting sites. 
Identity and Access Management, Governance, Risk, and|Alert Enterprise provides infrastructure protection through governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) management, situational awareness, and continuous monitoring. 
Cloud Security, Web Application Firewall, Security Information|Alert Logic provides a hosted “security as a service” platform that offers intrusion prevention, log management, and related protections for enterprise customers. 
Data Encryption|Alertsec offers full disk encryption as a cloud service to ensure that only authorized users can access your computers. 
Firewall Platform|AlgoSec provides a suite of enterprise firewall management tools for policy, configuration, and analysis of rules, configuration, and design. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Vulnerability Management|Allgress provides a suite of products and solutions focused on governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) and vulnerability management. 
Mobile Security|AllthatSoft is a global innovator that provides advanced security solutions to enterprise network and mobile applications. The company offers a range of solutions including TouchWallet, DefenseNet, and AppServo which are designed to make sure that today’s enterprise network, personal transactions and mobile life are more secure and safer. 
Security Information Event Management, Threat Intelligence,|AlienVault offers a unified security management platform that leverages an open and collaborative threat-sharing model for continuous, updated threat intelligence and analytics. Over 4,000 customers use the USM platform worldwide for threat detection, incident response and compliance management. 
Cyber Insurance, Content Protection|AllClear ID provides products and services that help protect people and their personal information from threats related to identity theft. AllClear ID is led by technology and customer service teams who advise companies on data breach response and support consumers who have become victims of identity theft. 
ICS/IoT Security, Hardware/Embedded Security|Allegro Software provides software resources to developers for embedded devices, including solutions for embedded device security. 
Network Monitoring|Allot Communications is a multinational with offices and subsidiaries in many countries across the world. Allot provides network monitoring, IP service optimization, network monetization, and security solutions. 
Managed Security Services|Allstream is a Canadian telecommunications company offering a range of voice, IP, and unified communications, including managed security services. 
Infrastructure Security, IoT Security|AlphaGuardian provides solutions for data center and infrastructure security management. 
VAR Security Solutions|Alpine Cyber Solutions offers cyber security services, security architecture, infrastructure engineering, and technical training for business customers. 
Security Recruiting|Alta Associates provides executive search capabilities and support in the area of cyber security. 
Digital Forensics, Data Destruction|Since 1994, Altep has been assisting corporations and law firms with complex data and discovery management initiatives. Our primary goal is always to identify the strategies, techniques and technologies that can save our clients time and money, allowing them to meet discovery and compliance obligations thoroughly and efficiently. 
VAR Security Solutions|Alus Outsourcing provides value added reseller (VAR) security solutions to customers in Brazil. 
VAR Security Solutions|ALVEA Services is a service aggregator offering a comprehensive portfolio of Managed IT Security and Cloud based computing solutions. All services are delivered through one easy- to-use platform, and are fully backed by best-of-breed technology and our ALVEA specialists. 
VAR Security Solutions|Aman Information Systems is a premier IT Solutions company founded in the year 1985 and established its operations in Jordan during 1998.We provide premier management, technical and professional services in the fields of Information Technology and Security Systems to help clients successfully manage complex businesses,projects and facilities keeping in mind the advances in technology and adapting it to the requirements of the clients. 
Cloud Security, Infrastructure Security, Secure File Sharing,|Amazon Web Services (AWS) offers a range of cloud services, including virtualized security products arranged as a marketplace for users of AWS services. 
Threat Intelligence, Digital Forensics|Amgine Securus offers products and services to help security teams respond to threats both with tools to help secure your network as well as to provide enhanced security training. 
VPN/Secure Access|AnchorFree provides a virtual private network (VPN) for secure web browsing, especially in public WiFi hotspots. 
Security Analytics, Network Monitoring|Anodot provides a real time analytics and automated anomaly detection system that discovers outliers in vast amounts of data and turns them into valuable business insights. Analyzing the massive quantity of metrics generated by today’s businesses – manually or with traditional business intelligence tools – takes time and expertise. Using patented machine learning algorithms, Anodot isolates issues and correlates them across multiple parameters in real time, eliminating business insight latency and supporting rapid business decisions through its uncovered insights. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Analytics|Anomali, formerly Threat Stream, provides a threat intelligence platform that translates multi-source acquisition to actionable operations. 
VPN/Secure Access|Anonymizer provides personal VPN service for keeping on-line Internet access private. 
Web Fraud Prevention, Data Leakage Prevention|Anonyome Labs is a privacy and anonymity company that creates fake online profiles for users, allowing them to browse, search, shop, and socialize anonymously. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Antiy Labs provides an anti-virus SDK engine and next- generation anti-virus services for PC and mobile malware. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance, Secure File Sharing|ANX provides a range of managed compliance and collaboration services including PCI DSS compliance and secure connectivity. 
Cyber Insurance, Security Consulting|Aon provides risk management and insurance brokerage services, including cyber insurance. 
Network Monitoring|APCON provides network-monitoring solutions for data center security and optimization. 
Mobile Security, Security Analytics, Identity and Access Mgmt|Appdome is a mobile service company that implements mobile service SDK’s or API’s to mobile applications without adding code to the application. 
Mobile Security|Apperian provides a range of mobile app management solutions including mobile app security. 
Endpoint Security|AppGuard is a security software company that develops security solutions for Windows platforms. These solutions detect attacks at their initial stages and has a light footprint in the Endpoint category. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|Applied Control Solutions provides technical consulting, books, and resources related to the cyber protection of industrial control, SCADA, and related operational technology-based systems and critical infrastructure. 
Web Application Firewall, PCI DSS Compliance|Applicure Technologies develops the leading multi-platform web application security software products to protect web sites and web applications from external and internal attacks. Built upon years of research into hacker behavior, Applicure solutions feature a comprehensive knowledge base to identify attacks accurately, and stop them before they reach the website or application. 
Data Destruction|Applied Magnetics Lab provides a range of data destruction products for hard drives and other media. 
ICS/IoT Security, Penetration Testing, Security Training and|Applied Risk is focused on critical infrastructure security and combating security breaches that pose a significant threat. Operating on a global scale, they work with a wealth of large organisations that rely on expertise to safeguard their critical assets. Their proven experience of identifying vulnerabilities and security risks is based on methodologies honed over years of conducting assessments in industrial environments. Their engineering experience and cyber security knowledge proves invaluable in securing the critical infrastructures and industrial assets of companies across the globe. 
Information Assurance|ApplyLogic provides IT, network, program management, and cyber security/information assurance services to Federal Government customers. 
Email Security|AppRiver provides a virtual, software-as-a-service (SaaS), cloud- based platform for anti-Spam, hosted Exchange, email encryption, and Web security. 
Application Security, Penetration Testing, Security Training,|AppSec Labs provides application security services including design, analysis, training, and assurance. 
Mobile Security, Application Security|Appthority provides enterprise mobile threat protection, combining deep threat intelligence, tailored risk assessment and remediation, and integration with enterprise security ecosystems. 
Cloud Security, Application Security|Aqua Security focuses on providing protection for virtual environments such as Docker. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Managed Security Services|ARAMA TECH provides governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) solutions including focus on security management and process. 
Managed Security Services, VAR Security Solutions|Arcon is a managed security services provider serving enterprise customers in Latin America. 
Security Information Event Management, Incident Response,|Arctic Wolf Networks provides a concierge security-as-a-service (SaaS) cloud-based SIEM and incident response solutions for business customers. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Area 1 Security is a start-up security focused on preemptive defense against targeted phishing attacks based on behavioral analysis. 
IoT/ICS|Argus Cyber Security is an Israeli automotive cyber security company. They provide comprehensive solution suites to protect connected cars and commercial vehicles against cyber-attacks. Argus offers innovative security methods and proven computer networking know-how with a deep understanding of automotive best practices. 
Content Protection|Armjisoft provides a range of digital rights management (DRM) solutions for license protection, watermarking, and related protections. 
Cloud Security, Threat Intelligence|Armor provides secure cloud hosting with several layers of enterprise-grade functional security and compliance capabilities. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Aruvio provides an enterprise governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) platform on the Salesforce cloud. 
Application Security, Mobile Security, Content Protection|Arxan Technologies provides run-time application protection solutions against tampering, reverse engineering, malware insertion, and piracy on mobile, desktop, server, and embedded platforms. Arxan solutions are used to protect applications across a range of industries, including: Mobile Payments & Banking, Automotive IoT, Healthcare IoT, Gaming, DRM, and High-Tech. Arxan's security products are used to protect the confidentiality of applications, which can be breached by reverse-engineering, code analysis and other means, and the integrity of applications that can be compromised through code modification, malware insertion and other types of attacks. 
Security Consulting|Ascentor provides information risk management (IRM) consulting services for business and government customers. 
Wireless Security, Digital Forensics|Asgard Group provides a range of wireless RF-based and communications security solutions for counterintelligence and cyber investigations. 
VAR Security Solutions|Asgent provides network security and services for enterprise businesses, primarily in Japan. 
Security Recruiting|Ashton Search Group provides technical and engineering search and recruiting with cyber security opportunities from the firm’s large defense client base. 
Mainframe Security|Advanced Software Products Group (ASPG) provides a range of security products focused on mainframe systems, data security, and access management. 
Information Assurance, Security Recruiting, Security Consulting|Assevero provides a range of information assurance, security recruiting, and security consulting services focused on government customers. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Assure Technical provides a range of cyber and physical security consulting services including training. 
Security Training, Vulnerability Management|Assured Information Security, Inc., a software company, focuses on critical air force and Department of Defense cyber technology research. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting, Security|Assuria provides security solutions, security software, and managed SIEM services supporting security operations and enterprise security needs. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting|AssurIT is an information technology (IT) services and solutions provider that specializes in cyber security consulting. The company is located in the Washington DC metropolitan area and serves both government and commercial clients. 
Security Consulting|AsTech provides a range of security consulting services in the areas of discovery, remediation, software development, and training. 
Security Training|Ataata seeks to reduce human error through more engaging security training methods. 
DDOS Security, VPN Security, Threat Intelligence|A10 Networks provides a range of network acceleration and application support products including security and DMZ optimization. 
Security Information Event Management|A3Sec provides a range of IT security solutions and professional services including security information event management (SIEM) capabilities from AlienVault. 
Digital Forensics|Atlantic Data Forensics provides data forensics, eDiscovery, cybercrime, and expert testimony services. 
Endpoint Security, IoT Security|Atomicorp provides advanced security protections for Linux and Windows servers. 
Penetration Testing, Security Consulting, Embedded Security,|Atredis Partners provides software security research, embedded security, and penetration testing services. 
Security Consulting, Mainframe Security, Penetration Testing|atsec provides laboratory and consulting services in the area of information security. 
Managed Security Services, DDOS Security, Email Security,|AT&T is a major tier 1 global service provider offering a range of managed and network-based security services to business customers. 
Security Consulting, Security Training, PCI DSS/Compliance|Attack Research (AR) is a boutique security firm located in Northern New Mexico which specializes in advanced information security, especially concerning targeted and sophisticated attacks. Rather than offering security-only focused solutions, AR works to understand the client’s business needs in order to tailor the best solution possible. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, ICS/IoT Security, Threat|Attivo Networks empowers a proactive defense with deception-based threat detection, which includes automated attack analysis, forensics, and orchestration for accelerated incident response. 
Endpoint Security, Network Security|Auconet provides a scalable ITOM platform called BICS that does not lock you into vendor specific engagements. Auconet is trusted by industry leaders, including Siemens, DHL, Deutsche Bahn, BASF, and ING for real-time monitoring, control, security, and management of their complex IT infrastructures. Auconet BICS’ robust next-generation platform transforms IT infrastructure management from a cacophony of archaic ITSM and single-purpose tools, to a simplified, streamlined solution that dramatically improves productivity and lowers TCO. 
Vulnerability Management, Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Audit Square provides a Microsoft Windows security, configuration, and audit assessment tools for desktops and servers. 
Security Consulting, Vulnerability Management|Aujas Networks provides security solutions in risk and vulnerability management, data protection, and identity and access management. 
Managed Security Services, Penetration Testing|Aura Information Security offers a range of information security consulting and managed security services for enterprise customers. 
Identity and Access Management, GRC|Aurionpro Solutions Limited engages in the software development and related activities primarily in India, the United States, the Middle East, Singapore, and internationally. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services, Email Sercurity,|Aurora Information Security & Risk provides a range of security consulting solutions for enterprise customers. 
Endpoint Security|Authentic8 uses cloud-based secure container technology to protect web apps for users and developers. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Authentify, part of Early Warning, provides telephony-based, out- of-band, multi-factor authentication for on-line services. 
Two-Factor Authentication|AuthLite provides Windows two-factor authentication using a USB key and associated password. 
Two-Factor Authentication|AuthRocket provides a user management API to support its authentication as a service. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Authy provides a two-factor authentication solution for users, developers, and enterprise. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|Auth0 provides a product that allows developers to add identity federation to their apps. 
Endpoint Security|Autonomic Software provides endpoint management and security plug-ins integrated with McAfee ePO to support update and patching. 
Cloud Security|Avanon provides cloud access security for SaaS offerings including Office365, Google, and Box. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Avast provides an endpoint solution that includes Anti-Virus and related security functions. 
Identity and Access Management, Password/Privilege|Avatier provides identity management software, services, and audit controls for enterprise customers. 
Password/Privilege Management, Identity and Access|Avecto focuses on providing Windows-based privilege management for desktops and servers. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Secure File Sharing|AvePoint provides governance, risk, and compliance solutions for Microsoft enterprise and cloud deployments. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Averon is an authentication security company that builds full autonomous solutions based around authenticating using data and network providers. 
Penetration Testing, Security Consulting, Cyber Insurance|AVeS provides a range of IT consulting focused on digital information and information security. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Mobile Security|AVG provides anti-virus and malware protection for PCs and mobile devices. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Endpoint Security, Mobile Security|Avira Operations GmbH & Co. KG is a German multinational security software company mainly known for their antivirus software Avira Internet Security. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, PCI DSS/Compliance|Avnet provides security-consulting services with emphasis on helping companies secure their databases. 
ID&P, Threat Intelligence|Awake Security, Inc. develops cybersecurity analytics solutions using big data and machine learning 
Identity and Access Management|Axiomatics provides a suite of attribute-based access control and dynamic authorization solutions based on the XACML 3.0 standard. 
Security Analytics|Axon Ghost Sentinel provides artificial intelligence-based “swarm technology” with applicability to anomaly detection, situational awareness, and monitoring. 
VAR Security Solutions, Information Assurance, Security|Axxum Technologies is an IT security services and solutions company focused on government customers. 
Secure File Sharing|Axway provides a suite of solutions that govern and secure the flow of data across the enterprise, B2B communities, cloud infrastructure, and mobile devices. 
Security Consulting, Digital Forensics, Penetration Testing,|Azorian Cyber Security provides a range of cyber security services for enterprise customers. 
Information Assurance, Threat Intelligence, PCI DSS/Compliance|BAE Systems Inc. offers cyber security and information assurance solutions, with the Department of Defense as a major customer. 
Data Encryption|Baffle seeks to provide encryption on data at all times including the times when the data is being processed. 
Network Monitoring, Security Analytics|BalaBit offers real-time, intelligence-based network security analytics. 
Security Consulting|Bambenek Consulting provides a range of cybersecurity consulting including IT forensics. 
IDPS, NAC, Security Training|Bandura provides a product that they call “the firewall’s firewall” which improves your network’s ability to filter attacks. 
Web Security|Banff Cyber provides a solution for Web defacement along with complementary security consulting offers. 
Security Recruiting|Barclay Simpson provides IT security and audit search and recruitment services in the UK and around the world. 
Endpoint Security|Barkly provides an endpoint security solution that collects real time data to prevent malware attacks. 
Firewall Platform, Email Security, Web Application Firewall,|Barracuda Networks offers enterprise email security, web security, and traditional and next-generation firewall and SSL/VPN products with emphasis on small and medium businesses. 
Wireless Security|Bastille provides a solution for scanning enterprise wireless air space for airborne threats with emphasis on IoT security. 
Security Analytics, Vulnerability Management, Data Leakage|Bay Dynamics® enables organizations to quantify the business impact of cyber risk from both insider and outsider attacks. Using UEBA technology and dynamic telemetry from security and IT infrastructure, the company’s Risk Fabric® analytics platform calculates the value at risk associated with specific threats and vulnerabilities, and prescribes prioritized actions across the organization to reduce the risks that matter most. 
ICS/IoT Security|Visibility, control, and protection for industrial Operational Technology. Incorporating threat intelligence, and deep filtration, Bayshore parses OT protocol content and context, validating commands and parameters. Bayshore can allow, alert, and/or enforce policy at line speed – allowing whitelisted communication while blocking or modifying unauthorized communication and commands. 
Endpoint Security, Mobile Security|Beachhead Solutions provides subscription services to secure and manage mobile devices through a Web-based interface. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Fraud Detection|BehavioSec provides a biometric authentication solution based on behavioral attributes such as typing and clicking patterns. 
Digital Forensics|Belkasoft provides digital forensic investigations software solutions for law enforcement, military, and business. Founded in 2002, Belkasoft is a global leader in digital forensics technology, known for their sound and comprehensive forensic tools. With a team of professionals in digital forensics, data recovery and reverse engineering, Belkasoft focuses on creating technologically advanced yet easy-to-use products for investigators and forensic experts to make their work easier, faster, and more effective. 
Managed Security Services, DDOS Security, PCI|Bell Canada offers a full range of wired and wireless telecommunication services, including managed security. 
Security Recruiting|Benchmark Executive Search provides search and recruiting services with focus areas in cyber security. 
Hardware Security, Mobile Security|Berkeley Varitronics Systems, Inc. designs, manufactures, and sells radio frequency (RF) analysis and wireless threat detection tools to manage secure facilities and maintain wireless networks. 
Mobile Security|BETTER provides mobile security and mobile app security protection through a lightweight endpoint agent. 
Vulnerability Management, Application Security|Beyond Security provides a range of vulnerability assessment and security testing solutions for networks, applications, systems, and software. 
Password/Privilege Management, Identity and Access|BeyondTrust offers a range of enterprise security products with focus on privilege and identity management for servers and other IT software. 
Security Consulting, Security Training, Data Leakage Prevention|BHC Laboratory provides independent security consultation and advice for business customers. 
Data Encryption|BicDroid utilizes machine learning to encrypt your data and provide data control in a way that makes sense based on your needs. 
GRC Platform, Information Assurance, Cloud Security, Incident|BigID provides data privacy management tools and platform with enterpsie and personal data protection services. BigID also provides GRC service. Headquaters BigID Israel Ahad Ha’Am St 54, Tel Aviv-Yafo 6579402 Israel 524 Broadway New York NY 10012 United States Tel: +1 (917) 765-5727 Executives Dimitri Sirota serves as the CEO and Co-founder of BigID. Nimrod Vax is the Co-founder and CPO of BigID. History BigID was founded in 2016 by security industry veterans spanning the identity, data security, big data and governance markets. BigID has offices in the US and Israel Key Competitors DocAuthority, Abine, Fortanix Prifender Products and Services BigID aims to transform how enterprise protect and manage the privacy of personal data. BigID provides the following services • EU GDPR • PI/PII Discovery • Data Mapping • Data Labeling • Data Subject Rights • Article 30 • Consent Management • PIA Automation • Breach Response • De-identification • Data Quality • Cloud Migration Website https://bigid.com/ BigPanda (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/06/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Security Information Event Management Brief Overview BigPanda offers one of the world’s first Autonomous Digital Operations Platform that intelligently automates IT incidents. Powered by our unique Open Box Machine Learning technology, BigPanda helps your IT Ops team handle more incidents, respond more quickly, and dramatically improve on key metrics such as MTTD, MTTA and MTTR. 
Security Information Event Management|BigPanda offers one of the world’s first Autonomous Digital Operations Platform that intelligently automates IT incidents. Powered by our unique Open Box Machine Learning technology, BigPanda helps your IT Ops team handle more incidents, respond more quickly, and dramatically improve on key metrics such as MTTD, MTTA and MTTR. 
Cloud Security, Network Monitoring|Big Switch Networks is a software-defined networking solution provider with support for in-line security service chaining. 
Security Training|Billington CyberSecurity, a leading cybersecurity education provider founded in 2010, produces a leading world class annual summit—now entering its 9th year—an International summit, a newsletter and a range of other services about the cybersecurity field. It convenes top leaders in cybersecurity, provides unparalleled networking at exclusive venues and addresses the top cybersecurity issues facing government and industry alike. 
Penetration Testing|BINAR10 offers security services including penetration testing, ethical hacking, and open source security. 
Web Security, Managed Security Services|Ingen Security provides a managed security solution to reduce the threat of attacks to Websites. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Web Fraud Prevention|BioCatch is a cybersecurity company that delivers behavioral biometrics analyzing human-device interactions to protect users and data. Banks and other enterprises use BioCatch to significantly reduce online fraud and protect against a variety of cyber threats, without compromising the user experience. Headquarter BioCatch (US) 135 E 57th Street New York, NY 10022 Executives Howard Edelstein – Chairman & CEO Avi Turgeman – Founder, CTO & VP of Business Development Uri Rivner – Co-Founder, Chief Cyber Officer History BioCatch was founded in 2011 by Avi Turgeman and Uri Rivner and has offices in Israel, London, New York, Colombia, and Brazil. They have raised $41.6M in total from Blumberg Capital, CreditEase, American Express Ventures, and others. Key Competitors CyberInt, CashShield, VerifyMe, CSIdentity Products and Services BioCatch's behavioral biometrics patented technology uses continuous authentication by collecting and analyzing over 2000 traits after login to prevent real-time fraud. When an unusual behavior is detected, real-time alerts are generated, and the activity is logged and visualized in the Analyst Station: • Analyst Station web portal – a front-end component, add-on module of the BioCatch solution that provides a running view of all sessions and their risk scores, and provides a powerful, visual picture of session activity, including all types of remote access takeovers and Trojans, malware and other behavioral anomalies which are indicative of fraud. Empowered with real-time reporting and alert notifications, the BioCatch Analyst Station and Threat Detection Module allows case managers to better detect, protect against, and act in the face of cyberthreats. Website https://www.biocatch.com/ BIOWATCH (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/02/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Two-Factor Authentication Brief Overview BIOWATCH provides a wearable means of authentication that can replace badges, cards, keys, and password. 
Two-Factor Authentication|BIOWATCH provides a wearable means of authentication that can replace badges, cards, keys, and password. 
Secure File Sharing|Biscom provides secure file sharing, secure fax, and enterprise file synchronization solutions. Founded in 1986 by S.K. Ho, Carlos Mainemer, and Bill Agudelo, Biscom pioneered the fax server and computer fax marketplaces with FAXCOM® and its award-winning fax management solutions. Since then, Biscom has developed expertise and solutions around secure file transfer, synchronization, file translation, and mobile devices, designed to deliver mission-critical reliability, streamline workflows and reduce costs. Supported by our highly responsive support team, Biscom remains committed to developing innovative content delivery solutions for the world’s largest organizations. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Wireless Security,|Bishop Fox provides cyber security consulting, assessment, and testing services to enterprise customers. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance,|Bitcrack provides a range of security consulting services for business customers including penetration testing, red/blue- teaming and threat intelligence. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Mobile Security|Bitdefender provides Anti-Virus solutions for home users, small and medium business, and enterprise. 
Cloud Security|Bitglass provides a cloud access security broker for protected mobile access to public cloud services. 
Identity and Access Management, Password/Privilege|Bitium provides a cloud-based platform for managing passwords, users, and SaaS application access. 
Digital Forensics, Security Training|BitSec Global Forensics consults with government and law enforcement agencies to help detect, prevent, and investigate cyber crime and terrorism. 
Security Consulting, Security Training, Penetration Testing|Bitshield security provides IT security consulting services and professional training for customers in the Philippines. 
Security Consulting|BitSight provides a security posture assessment and rating for organizations based on their visible behavior. 
Two-Factor Authentication|BI2 Technologies offers a suite of biometric identification and intelligence solutions. 
Network Monitoring|Bivio Networks provides deep packet inspection (DPI) for cyber security, surveillance, and network monitoring. 
Mobile Security, IoT/ICS Security, Secure File Sharing, Voice|Blackberry is a mobile technology company supporting enterprise, messaging, devices, IoT and secure communications. 
Application Security, Endpoint Security, Open Source Security|Black Duck Software provides application security, container security, and compliance for open source software management. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|Blackfoot provides a range of security consultants including risk, PCI, security awareness, and other areas. 
Security Recruiting|Blackmere Consulting provides talent acquisition and executive search with a practice in cyber security. 
Cloud Security, Infrastructure Security, DDoS Security, Secure|BlackRidge Technology provides network segmentation, cloud and server isolation, and software defined perimeter by authenticating network traffic at the transport layer. 
Security Information Event Management|BlackStratus provides SIEM products and related services with emphasis on managed service providers as well as enterprise customers. 
Data Encryption, DLP, PCI, GRC|Bloombase provides solutions to help organizations encrypt their data and prevent data exfiltration threats. Bloombase develops and markets a complete basket of enterprise information security solutions to address these security issues. Bloombase Technologies formulated a vision of least invasive information security solution approach for next generation enterprise data transit and storage systems to accelerate electronic business. This vision brings together distributed and heterogeneous systems with seamless connectivity and empowers enterprise applications and systems with security by use of state-of-the-art cryptographic, service-oriented architecture and network technologies. 
Network Access Control|BlueCat is an Enterprise DNS company located in Canada. 
Mobile Security|Blue Cedar designs and develops infrastructure software. The company offers a security application and connectivity solutions that helps to protect the assets and empower uses across extended enterprises. Blue Cedar serves customers across the globe. 
Cloud Security|BlueData Software is a stealth mode start-up providing secure, Big Data private clouds for enterprise. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Blue Lance provides enterprise solutions, products, and services in support of security governance, compliance, and audit. 
Threat Intelligence|Blueliv provides an end-to-end cloud-based cyber threat intelligence solution that protects companies from malicious attacks. They scour the web, the deep web and the dark web to deliver fresh, targeted and actionable threat intelligence to organizations across multiple industries to protect their networks from the outside in. 
Hardware/Embedded Security, Endpoint Security, Security R&D|BlueRISC provides hardware-assisted endpoint security for anti- tamper and cyber protection. 
Data Security|BlueTalon provides security and access solutions for Hadoop Big Data applications and infrastructure. 
Managed Security Services, Digital Forensics, Unified Threat|BlueVoyant is a security services company that provides threat detection, managed services, and cyber forensics. 
2FA, Password Management|Bluink seeks to make password management easier by using your phone for authentication. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Network Monitoring|BluVector provides an advanced threat detection and network- monitoring platform for the enterprise. 
Information Assurance|In addition to Boeing’s commercial airplane business, it includes a business focused on Defense, Space, and Security. Within this unit, Boeing provides cyber security solutions with strong emphasis on Federal Government solutions. 
Data Encryption, Secure File Sharing|Boldon James provides data classification, secure messaging, and a range of related security products. 
VPN/Secure Access|Bomgar provides secure remote access through firewalls without the need for a separate VPN. It is a remote support solution that allows support technicians to remotely connect to end-user systems through firewalls from their computer or mobile device. 
Data Encryption, Data Leakage Prevention, Secure File Sharing,|Boole Server is a well-established software vendor of secure file sharing and collaboration solutions 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance, Threat Intelligence|Booz Allen Hamilton provides a range of management and technology consulting services, including cyber security consulting. They are an American management and information technology consulting firm based in McLean, Virginia 
Secure File Sharing|BotDoc is an intuitive, easy to use solution to transport sensitive data. Led by a team of visionary engineers and practitioners, this solution is applicable across industries and serves as a unique solution to growing security concerns surrounding the transport of confidential material. 
Brand Protection|Bouju provides solutions for enterprise brand protection including IP protection via data collection and analysis. Bouju is passionate about applying advanced technology to solve the biggest problems faced by high profile brands in the global online marketplace. 
Data Encryption, Cloud Security|Boxcryptor is an end-to-end data encryption tool for public cloud services such as Dropbox, OneDrive and Google Drive. It is available for private users, self-employed persons, small businesses and enterprises. 
Cloud Security|Bracket Computing provides an enterprise grade secure infrastructure for multiple clouds with embedded security and control. 
Network Access Control, Network Monitoring|Bradford Networks provides network access control (NAC) solutions through its Network Sentry product and associated services. Bradford Networks, a Fortinet Company, is leading the transformation of network security through visibility, control and response. The company continues to provide proven expertise in achieving tangible security improvements to enterprises worldwide. 
Secure File Sharing|Brainloop offers solutions for companies to securely collaborate and control information with external partners. 
Managed Security Services, Vulnerability Management, 2FA|Braintrace is a privately held, boutique, sole source cybersecurity provider. Braintrace’s services include Managed Detection and Response (MDR), Managed SIEM, SIEM-as-a-Service, SOC-as- a-Service, Advisory Services, and Incident Response. 
Security Recruiting|Brandon Becker provides search and recruiting services for professionals in the areas of networking, cloud, security, and virtualization. 
Threat Intelligence and Brand Protection|BrandProtect helps organizations gain control over how they are represented online by uncovering and mitigating the threats that put their rights, revenue streams and reputation at risk. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Bricata offers next-generation intrusion prevention appliances and cloud solutions. 
Security Recruiting|Bridgen Group provides search and recruiting services with emphasis on cyber response technology. 
VAR Security Solutions|Bridgeway Security Solutions is a consultative information security reseller offering support and guidance for businesses, especially in the UK. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Analytics|BrightPoint Security, formerly Vorstack, provides real-time warning and analytic information related to threats based on peer collaboration, federation, and correlation techniques. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Analytics|Brinqa provides an integrated GRC platform for performing risk analytics and placing risk into business context. 
Endpoint Security|Bromium provides an enterprise security suite that enables endpoints to protect themselves using CPU-based isolation, while continuously monitoring and correlating activity across all endpoints to enable the organization to protect itself, detect and respond to targeted attacks and attempted breaches, in real time. 
Email Security, Security Training, Penetration Testing, Incident|BSI cybersecurity is a divison of the BSI Group. BSI Group, also known as the British Standards Institution (BSI), is the national standards body of the United Kingdom. BSI produces technical standards on a wide range of products and services, and also supplies certification and standards-related services to businesses. 
Managed Security Services, DDOS Security, Infrastructure|BT provides broadband, television, phone, and Internet products, including managed security services for businesses. 
Penetration Testing, Cloud Security, Web Security|Buddha Labs provides IT security and automated, hardened images for public, private, and hybrid clouds including Amazon Web Services. 
Endpoint Security|BUFFERZONE provides an endpoint container security solution that addresses advanced malware, zero-day threats, and drive-by attacks. 
Fraud Prevention|Buguroo offers a variety of solutions for fraud prevention. They take advantage of deep learning, biometrics, and real time response to distinguish themselves from other vendors. 
Bug Bounty Support|Bugcrowd provides a platform that provides support for managed bug bounty programs. 
Penetration Testing, Security Consulting, Security Training|BugSec offers a range of information security services and products for enterprise customers. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Mobile Security|BullGuard provides Internet security, anti-virus, and malware protection for endpoint devices. 
Security Consulting|Burns and McDonnell makes available a vast array of engineering services in many different areas including integrated security focused on compliance. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|BWise offers governance, risk, and compliance software solutions to support risk management, control, compliance, and audit. 
Password/Privilege Management, Two-Factor Authentication,|CA Technologies provides a suite of IT management products and services, including solutions for securing data and identities. 
Information Assurance|CACI provides Federal Government customers with a comprehensive range of information solutions and services including cyber security and information assurance. 
Security Consulting, Security Recruiting|Caliber Security Partners provides security technical and strategic advisory services, as well as staffing services, for enterprise customers. 
2FA, Identity and Access Management|Callsign’s technology focuses on Intelligence driven authentication and verification. 
Unified Threat Management|Calyptix Security provides network security including UTM firewalls and VOIP security for small and medium sized businesses. 
Consulting|Capgemini is one of the world’s largest providers of technology consulting, outsourcing, and professional services with almost 190,000 employees in over 40 countries. 
Identity Protection|Capita provides identity verification products with emphasis on age checking for on-line services. 
Security Consulting, Application Security|Capstone Security offers services in the area of application security, regulatory compliance, and security assessments. 
Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems|Capsule8 is developing one of the industry’s first zero-day attack detection platform purpose-built for modern production environments. 
VAR Security Solutions, Information Assurance|Carahsoft provides value added solutions including security and information assurance for the Federal Government. 
Endpoint security|Carbon Black (previously Bit9 + Carbon Black) provides continuous monitoring of endpoints and servers toward malware protection, real-time visibility, threat detection, incident response, and forensic investigation. 
Penetration Testing, Security Consulting, ICS/IoT Security|Carve Systems provides security consulting and penetration testing services for IoT devices. 
Cloud Security|Catbird focuses on Software-Defined Segmentation and Security for the Hybrid IT Infrastructure. Catbird’s software suite of products was designed to provide visibility into and protection of private clouds and virtual Data Centers, and is available for both VMware and OpenStack. 
Cloud Security|Cato Networks provides cloud-based and enterprise-grade secure networking. 
Digital Forensics, Web Fraud Prevention|Caveon provides digital forensics and security audit services to help schools prevent test fraud. 
Cloud Security|Cavirin provides various services to help manage hybrid cloud environments. 
Cloud Secuirty, Application Security, PCI-DSS Compliance,|CBI IT company that manages Cyber Security risks and ensures your data is secure, compliant, and available. Headquaters 1260 Library Street Detroit, MI 48226 Tel:(800) 747-8585 Executives Steve Barone serves as the CEO and the President. He is also the founder of CBI. Steve has served on global and regional advisory boards for technology companies, including the fourth largest software company in the world, Symantec. History CBI was founded in 1991 by Steve Barone. CBI has become one of the largest and most trusted IT advisory services and network security firms in the nation. Key Competitors Mandiant, ArcSight, Feitian Technologies Products and Services CBI provides trusted advisor to meet their unique needs with solutions from the best professionals in the industry. CBI’s Subject Matter Expertise ensures they deliver on promise to help defend and secure your network and endpoints; test and monitor areas of operational risk; and protect your data. CBI provides security services such as Strategic Programs, CBI Security Manager and other solutions in the following areas: • Cloud Strategy • Digital Forensics • Identity Management • Integration • IR | Blue Team • Managed Products • Pen Testing | Red Team Website https://cbisecure.com/ CDW (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/15/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls VAR Brief Overview CDW is a multi-brand technology solutions provider to business government, education, and healthcare organizations in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. 
VAR|CDW is a multi-brand technology solutions provider to business government, education, and healthcare organizations in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. 
VPN/Secure Access, Web Security, Two-Factor Authentication|Celestix provides solutions for secure remote access connectivity to cloud and distributed offices, with additional capabilities such as Web security. Celestix Networks, Inc. develops information technology security appliances for network security and optimization, secure remote access, sensitive data protection, and token-less two-factor authentication applications worldwide. 
Voice Security|Cellcrypt provides a voice security application for trusted mobile communications on Android, iOS, BlackBerry, and Microsoft. 
Digital Forensics|Cellebrite provides mobile solutions with emphasis on the in- store retail experience. The company includes a mobile forensics division that provides technology to support law enforcement. 
Mobile Security|Cellrox provides a multi-persona mobile virtualization platform that encapsulates each persona within a secure zone to separate private and work usage. 
Security Training|CIS is a forward-thinking, non-profit entity that harnesses the power of a global IT community to safeguard private and public organizations against cyber threats. Their CIS Controls and CIS Benchmarks are a global standard and recognized for securing IT systems and data against pervasive attacks. CIS is also home to the Multi-State Information Sharing & Analysis Center® (MS-ISAC®). 
Endpoint Security|CenterTools provides the DriveLock solution, which includes data loss prevention (DLP), encryption, and other endpoint security solutions. 
Data Encryption|CENTRI provides an encryption-based solution for data protection. 
Identity and Access Management|Centrify provides an identity service across the data center, cloud, and mobile infrastructure with the goal of a single login for users and a central management scheme. 
Network Monitoring, Threat Intelligence|Centripetal Networks provides a real-time network protection solution that mitigates attacks at line-speed. 
Managed Security Services|CenturyLink is a telecommunications provider of Internet, TV, and voice, including a suite of managed security services for businesses. 
Data Encryption, Cloud Security|Certes Networks provides software-defined, encryption-based security for enterprise applications. 
CA/PKI Solutions, Identity and Access Management, ICS/IoT|CSS software and solutions enable digital authentication, encryption and signing technologies that safeguard access to identities, data, devices and applications. By protecting clients’ most valuable resources, CSS helps companies minimize risk, protect assets, and reduce operational expense by safeguarding access to information. 
CA/PKI Solutions|CertiPath provides high assurance trusted authority services in support of PKI infrastructure. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance|CGI provides global IT consulting, systems integration, and outsourcing, including a practice in cybersecurity. 
Application Security|Checkmarx provides static code analysis solutions that identify potential security vulnerabilities in software. 
Firewall Platform, Data Encryption, Intrusion|Check Point provides a full range of next generation security products and services. 
Email Security|CheckRecipient uses a software platform to monitor misaddressed emails and IP theft. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance|The Chertoff Group provides senior-level consultation and professional services to companies in the area of cyber security. The firm specializes in advising on mergers and acquisitions, security consulting, and business development, especially in the area of United States government interests. 
Managed Security Services|China Telecom is a large state-owned telecommunications provider of phone, Internet, mobile, and application services, including managed security. 
Threat Intelligence|Chronicle Security applies the usual Google tenets of machine learning and cloud computing to cybersecurity. The company is building a "cybersecurity intelligence platform" that can help organizations manage and understand their own data. 
Endpoint Security, File Integrity Monitoring|Cimcor provides a suite of file integrity monitoring and compliance solutions for the enterprise. 
Managed Security Services, Security Consulting|CIPHER provides information security, fraud protection, risk management, and transaction monitoring consulting services. 
Cloud Security, Data Leakage Prevention, Data Encryption|CipherCloud offers an open platform that provides enhanced security for organizations to use cloud and virtual applications such as Salesforce.com. Specific security functions include encryption, data loss prevention, and malware detection. 
Cloud Security, VPN/Secure Access|CipherGraph provides secure cloud-based virtual private networking (VPN) services. 
Security Consulting, VAR Security Solutions|cirosec provides security consulting and information security support for enterprise customers in Germany. 
Firewall Platform, Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Email|Cisco Systems provides a comprehensive suite of networking products including a portfolio of cyber security products and services. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|The CISO group offers information security consulting with an emphasis on PCI DSS compliance issues. 
ICS/IoT Security|Citadel builds an automated and modular drone defense solution that uses proprietary machine learning algorithms to detect and engage unwanted drones Headquaters 1st Avenue, San Diego California 92101 United States Executives Daniel Magy serves as the CEO of Citadel Defense. Joseph Makol is the CTO. History Daniel Magy, Joseph Makol and Henrik Borgstrom founded Citadel Defense in 2016. It was created by a small group of individuals who saw an emergent threat with very few practical solutions. A year of applied science followed by prototyping, testing and real-world trials have produced the required system. Key Competitors SkySafe, Drone Detector, Microdrones, DeTect Products and Services Citadel offers an automated UAV/UGV surveillance system that monitors airspace, detects threats, and tracks and intercepts unauthorized drones that enter restricted airspace. The Citadel User Control Interface allows operators to monitor and control the system's operating & engagement parameters in real time. Citadel solution successfully defeats drones and controllers in both 2.4/5.8GHz bands, including Wi-Fi and FPV devices. The solution will be extended to support drones operating at 300 MHz, 433 MHz, 915 MHz, and 1.2 GHz. The company offers products through resellers and its online store. Website https://www.dronecitadel.com Citrix (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/16/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Cloud Security, Secure File Sharing Brief Overview Citrix provides solutions for virtualization, networking, and cloud infrastructure, including security capabilities for virtual environments. 
Cloud Security, Secure File Sharing|Citrix provides solutions for virtualization, networking, and cloud infrastructure, including security capabilities for virtual environments. 
Application Security|CIX Software develops products focused on application behavioral analytics and real-time application self protection. 
Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems, Industrial Controls,|Claroty was built to secure and optimize OT (operational technology) networks to run critical infrastructures. Claroty uses the most granular OT network elements, extracts the critical information, and distills it into actionable insights needed to secure and optimize complex industrial control environments. 
Firewall Platform, VPN/Secure Access, NAC, Flexible Remote Access,|Clavister provides distributed enterprises with security solutions that protect and connect their business securely. The products are engineered in Sweden —not based on any conventional operating systems. The solutions provides multiple use-cases in the same setup providing secure connectivity and protection from threats. It also enables to take preventative measures to restrict inappropriate usage from inside the network. They run on appliances suitable for small to large offices but also virtualized to protect the cloud resources. Clavister’s solutions can be managed in-house by IT departments or can be operated by local specialized managed services partners. Headquartered in Örnsköldsvik, Sweden, with offices in Nordics, Germany, Japan and South East Asia, Clavister has more than 200.000 installations with customers in 154 countries. Solutions are sold under OEM by Nokia, D-Link and others. 
Endpoint Security|Cleafy protects web and mobile applications from tampering attempts and deploys countermeasures to guarantee data and content integrity. 
Web Security, Email Security, Data Leakage Prevention|Clearswift provides adaptive security protection for cloud, mobile, and email systems. 
Security Training, Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and|With over 400 customers utilizing its software and services, Clearwater has become the leader in healthcare cyber risk management and HIPAA compliance solutions. 
Data Encryption, Secure File Sharing|Cloak Labs provides end-to-end encryption of application data from the enterprise to partners. 
Managed Security Services, PCI DSS/Compliance, Network|Clone Systems is a managed security services provider that focuses on continuous monitoring, secure private cloud, security scanning, and consulting. 
Cloud Security, Data Encryption|Cloudera integrates security solutions including encryption into its Big Data Hadoop environment. 
Web Security, Network Monitoring, DDOS Security,|CloudFlare provides content distribution networking, domain name services, and network security. 
Cloud Security, Data Encryption|CloudLink, previously Afore Solutions, provides a range of advanced data encryption and related security control solutions for cloud applications and systems 
Cloud Security|CloudLock is a cloud security company focused on providing enterprise class security solutions for data in the cloud. 
Email Security, Mobile Messaging Security|Cloudmark offers a range of messaging security products for service providers and businesses that reduce the risk of abuse, phishing, malware, and other risks. 
Cloud Security|CloudMask is a SaaS solution that runs on user devices to intercept and analyze data to identify and encrypt sensitive information. 
Cloud Security|The CloudPassage Halo platform is purpose-built for broadly automated, portable, scalable, on-demand security and compliance. Delivered as a service, the Halo security orchestration engine includes automated security controls for instant visibility and continuous protection in any combination of data centers, private clouds and public clouds. 
Mobile Security, Wireless Security|Cloudpath, now part of the Ruckus Wireless Business Unit of Brocade, provides mobile device management and wireless security solutions supporting certificates for BYOD. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Penetration Testing, PCI|Coalfire is a cybersecurity advisor that helps private and public sector organizations avert threats, close gaps, and effectively manage risk. By providing independent and tailored advice, assessments, technical testing, and cyber engineering services, Coalfire helps clients develop scalable programs that improve their security posture, achieve their business objectives, and fuel their continued success. 
Bug Bounty Support, Penetration Testing|Cobalt (previously known as CrowdCurity) provides a platform for companies to offer a vulnerability reward program. 
Security Consulting|Coblue offers a security benchmark platform that allows organizations to assess security posture. 
Application Security|Code Dx provides tools for static software testing of applications to reduce the likelihood of exploitable vulnerabilities. 
Endpoint Security|Code42 secures endpoint data in real time so organizations can view, analyze and restore files--rapidly recovering from any data incident no matter the cause. 
Email Security, Threat Intelligence, Penetration Testing|Cofense Inc. operates as a software development company. The Company provides security software services. Cofense focuses on solutions for the problem of phishing and cyber security. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Collective Software provides USB and OAUTH-based two-factor authentication solutions. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Security Consulting, VAR Security|Comda provides a range of IT security products and services including biometrics, access control, consulting, and VAR integration. 
Secure File Sharing|Comilion provides decentralized solutions for secure collaboration and sharing both within an enterprise and between companies. 
CA/PKI Solutions, Anti-Malware Tools, Penetration Testing|Comodo provides a range of security software and SSL digital certificates for consumers and businesses. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security|CompliancePoint provides a range of compliance assessments, consulting, and managed IT. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|Comsec Consulting is an Israeli information security consukting firm that provides a range of security professional services for business customers. 
VAR Security Solutions|Conquest Security provides security services and solutions in conjunction with a set of security technology partners. 
Content Protection|ContentGuard provides a range of digital rights management (DRM)-based content management technology solutions. 
Web Security|ContentKeeper provides Internet and Web filtering and security solutions for schools, enterprise, and government. 
Content Protection, Secure File Sharing|Content Raven provides cloud-based solutions for protecting the distribution of files to internal and external groups for enterprise customers. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Application Security,|Content Security provides security consulting and professional services for enterprise customers. 
Security Consulting|Context Information Security (ContextIS), part of Babcock, provides security consulting and professional services for business clients. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|Contextual Security Solutions provides IT security, regulatory, and compliance consulting services for enterprise customers. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance,|Continuum GRC is a cyber security governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) software firm and the developer of the groundbreaking IT Audit Machine (ITAM IT audit software) GRC software, which speeds up GRC assessments and reporting processes by an average of 180%. 
Application Security, Vulnerability Management|Contrast Security provides an application security platform that enables continuous application security testing (AST), open source security, and runtime exploit prevention (RASP). 
Managed Security Services, PCI DSS/Compliance, Web|ControlScan provides a range of managed security services and compliance support solutions. 
Governance, Compliance, and Risk|Convercent provides a cloud-based platform to support governance, regulatory, and compliance (GRC), as well as investigative support for the enterprise. 
Threat Intelligence, Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Corax Cyber Security provides a range of security threat management and intelligence services using its Corax 360 cyber risk management platform. 
DDOS Security|Corero offers DDOS and IPS appliances, which serve as an enterprise network’s on-premise “first line of defense.” SecureWatch services are offered for threat and related security support. 
Network Monitoring, Intrusion Detection|Corelight offers a network visibility solution for information security professionals to help understand their network traffic and prevent attacks. 
Identity and Access Management, Vulnerability Management|Core Security provides vulnerability and access risk management solutions. 
Data Encryption|CORISECIO uses open source software as the basis for encryption solutions in the area of services oriented architecture (SOA), cloud, and mobile. 
Identity and Access Mgmt, Data Leakage Prevention, Anti-|CoroNet is a cloud-based service that offers data breach protection for business that also use cloud services. 
Security Information Event Management, Mainframe Security|CorreLog offers log management, security event correlation, and indexed search services. 
DDOS Security, SDN Security, Network Security|Corsa Technology networking and security infrastructure is the perfect combination of high performance and simplicity to create economic savings and operational brilliance in the network. 
Endpoint Security, Data Leakage Prevention|CoSoSys provides an endpoint security protection solution called Endpoint Protector that offers DLP, device control, and other features. 
Network Monitoring, Intrusion Detection|CounterCraft is a provider of deception and counterintelligence products. 
Endpoint Security, Incident Response|CounterTack focuses on endpoint security protections for the enterprise with the potential for active retaliation to attacks. 
Secure File Sharing|Covata provides encryption-based secure file sharing solutions. 
Secure File Sharing|Covertix provides a range of enterprise rights managed file security protection solutions. 
Identity and Access Management, ICS/IoT Security|Covisint provides a platform for managing identities and other attributes of the IoT ecosystem. 
Network Monitoring|cPacket Networks provides performance monitoring solutions that deliver real-time analysis and coverage. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting|CriticalStart provides information security services as well as resale of select security products for enterprise customers. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|Cross Match technologies provides identity management and biometric identity verification solutions. 
Endpoint Security, Threat Intelligence, Incident Response|CrowdStrike provides an endpoint security platform called Falcon that allows an enterprise to identify unknown malware and zero- day threats via a cloud-based model that delivers a combination of next gen AV, endpoint detection and response, and managed hunting. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Analytics|Crypteia Networks provides threat intelligence and related security analytic platform services. 
Data Encryption, Hardware/Embedded Security|Cryptography Research develops and licenses cryptographic technology solutions for semiconductor chips to reduce security risk across many industries. 
Data Encryption, CA/PKI Solutions|Cryptomathic provides security solutions for eBanking, PKI, ID and ePassport, card issuance, and related key management applications. 
Data Encryption, Data Leakage Prevention|CryptoMove is an active defense data protection company that protects data with dynamic movement, distribution, re-encryption, and mutation. 
Security Consulting|CryptoNet offers security consulting, hardware, and software solutions for risk analysis, network security, and application security to Italian customers. 
Security Analytics, Analysis|Cryptosense creates security analysis software with a focus on cryptographic systems. 
Data Encryption, CA/PKI Solutions|CryptoTec AG provides high-security solutions for connecting decentralized computer systems. 
Data Encryption, Security Consulting|Cryptsoft offers its customers with security architecture consulting and solutions development services. It offers encryption technology solutions development services for storage, security, and cloud products. 
VPN/Secure Access, Application Security|Cryptzone is a software company offering dynamic, user-centric network access security via its AppGate platform, as well as data security and content governance solutions. 
Information Assurance, Managed Security Services, Security|CSC provides a range of technology-enabled business products and services, including cyber security and information assurance. 
Network Monitoring, Incidence Response|CSPi Delivers products and consulting solutions focused on securing customers critical business assets. 
Information Assurance|In addition to integration, technology, consulting, and e- commerce, SRA also provides cyber security and information assurance solutions. 
Information Assurance|C3IA provides secure technical and information security/information assurance solutions for business and government customers. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Cura Software provides GRC and enterprise risk management solutions for the enterprise. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Curtail Security identifies and isolates zero-day exploits, allowing legitimate traffic to pass through the network uninterrupted. 
Data Encryption, CA/PKI Solutions|Cryptovision provides cryptography and public key infrastructure products for identity management, strong authentication, and digital signature. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Threat Intelligence|Cyber adAPT provides live network attack detection and forensics for mobile-enabled enterprise customers. 
Application Security|Cybera provides a secure application defined network (ADN) platform for hosting enterprise applications in the cloud and on- premise. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Cyber Alpha Security provides a range of security consulting services including ethical hacking. 
Password/Privilege Management, Identity and Access|CyberArk focuses on locking down privileged accounts to reduce security risk, especially advanced persistent threats (APTs). 
Endpoint Security, Security Training|CYBERBIT provides advanced endpoint detection, SOC automation, industrial control network protection and cyber security training and simulation. 
Security Training|CyberCrocodile provides instructor-led and interactive learning materials in IT and information security. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting, Information|Cyber Defense Agency provides cybersecurity risk assessment, architecture, design, systems administration, planning, education, and research and development. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Cyber Defense Labs is a cyber security, audit & advisory, and research organization focused on assisting corporate America, government, and community organizations with improving overall effectiveness while educating and improving corporate and community awareness and value. 
VAR Security Solutions, Information Assurance|CyberDefenses provides a range of security professional services for business and government customers. 
Digital Forensics, Security Training|Cyber Diligence provides professional services in the area of combatting and investigating cyber crimes. 
Managed Security Services|Cyber Engineering Services provides managed data protection services for small and mid-sized companies. 
Security Training|CyberGym provides realistic cyber security team training and exercises to help prepare for real attacks. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Consulting|CyberInt provides a range of intelligence, monitoring, and consulting services focused on information security and cyber warfare. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Cyberis provides information security, risk management, and assurance consulting services and solutions. 
Web Application Security|Cyberlytic uses artificial intelligence to classify attack data, identify threat characteristics, and prioritize high-risk attacks to provide web application security. 
Information Assurance|CNF Technologies provides a range of cyber operations and systems engineering solutions with emphasis on network defense and intrusion detection. 
Network Monitoring, ICS/IoT Security|CyberOwl offers an early warning system for cyber attacks through real-time monitoring of high value targets for malicious behavior. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting|CyberPoint International provides security professional services and information assurance to commercial and Federal Government clients. 
Endpoint Security, Security Analytics|Cybereason provides real-time detection, visualization, and termination of cyber attacks. 
Cyber Insurance|CyberRiskPartners provides a decision support cyber security platform for analytics and risk transfer. 
Information Assurance|Cybersalus provides cyber security and information assurance services and solutions including risk assessments and cyber operations. 
Security Recruiting|Cyber Search West provides recruiting and search services focused on the managed security services sector 
Security Recruiting|Cyber Security Recruiters provides search and recruiting services for information security professionals. 
Security Recruiting|Incident Response|CyberSponse provides a collaboration platform for supporting security incident response. 
Security Recruiting|Cyber 360 Solutions provides professional cyber security staffing solutions for its clients. 
Endpoint Security|Cyber Triage is an incident response software that simplifies the collection and analysis of endpoint data. 
Threat Intelligence|CyberUnited offers enterprise solutions based on threat intelligence, analytics, and machine learning to detect malicious insider behavior. 
Security Training|CyberVista is a cybersecurity training and workforce development company. 
ICS/IoT Security|CyberX provides protection support for industrial control networks through detecton of incidents, threats, and tamering. 
Email Security|CYBONET’s internet security and network control products enable SMB/Es and Telcos to comprehensively protect their critical network infrastructure. 
Security Training|Cybrary Inc. offers free and open source online information technology, computer training, and cyber security training services for beginners, experienced professionals, and families around the world. 
Application Security|CYBRIC provides visibility and assurance into all application security risks, as well as metrics and analytics that help organizations understand, measure and manage an enterprise security posture. 
Security Training|CYBRScore is a premium, performance-based cyber skills training and assessment provider that quantifies a user’s ability to defend a network. 
Intrusion Prevention, Data Encryption|_Cyel provides WAN equipment to build software-defined networks that are fully compatible with legacy infrastructure. _Cyel leverages moving target security to take away the aim for an attacker. 
Digital Forensics, Incident Response|Cyfir provides an enterprise forensics suite to support computer and network investigations and incident response. 
Security Information Event Management|Cygilant provides a platform called SOCVue that offers next- generation SIEM and log management capabilities toward real- time security intelligence management and situational awareness. 
Web Fraud Prevention, Intrusion Detection, Network Monitoring|Cykick Labs provides protection for websites from fraud & hacking by analyzing user behavior. 
Endpoint Security, Anti-Malware Tools|Cylance uses AI and machine learning to proactively prevent execution of advanced persistent threats the endpoint. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Security Analytics|Cymmetria offers deception-based intrusion detection technology with virtualization to detect advanced threats to an enterprise. 
Incident Response, Penetration Testing, PCI DSS Compliance|Cynergistek, Inc. provides outsourced document solutions, IT consulting data security, and managed print services primarily to the healthcare industry in the United States. 
Security Analytics, Endpoint Security|Cynet collects indicators and supports enterprise analysis for detection and mitigation of advanced threats. 
Data Encryption|Cypherix provides a range of personal encryption software products for Windows platforms. 
Network Monitoring, Security Analytics|Cyphort provides an advanced persistent threat (APT) management and protection platform that focuses on zero day and targeted attacks. 
Threat Intelligence|CYREN provides a cloud-based platform that makes threat data available to endpoints. 
Automated Cyber Risk Management|Cytegic’s scientific approach provides digital-related risk oversight across the entire organization. With Cutting-edge patented technology, Cytegic’s Automated Cyber Risk Officer provides best in industry cyber risk management with unprecedented accuracy, agility and friendliness. ACRO provides you with recommendations on specific operational defensive actions while helping determine which resources should be allocated to match risk tolerance and business strategy. 
VPN/Secure Access, Access Management, Application Security|Cyxtera is an evolution of enterprise IT, and a transformation in infrastructure security. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|Daon offers platforms, tools, and applications focused on identity assurance and biometrics for enterprise and government customers. 
Threat Detection, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Threat|Dark Cubed uses machine learning and data science to identify and understand the behavior of threat actors across disparate networks in real-time through a quick and easy to deploy SaaS offering. 
Network Monitoring|Dark Light Cyber uses an AI-based expert system for active cyber defense and trusted information sharing that allows analysits to codify their logical processes and run them at machine speed, 24- hours a day. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services, VAR/Security|DarkMatter provides a range of professional and managed security services and solutions. 
Security Analytics|Darktrace provides a platform that uses behavioral anomalies to detect cyber attacks in the enterprise. 
Password/Privilege Management, Identity and Access|Dashlane makes identity and payments simple and secure everywhere, with its password manager and secure digital wallet. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Datablink provides advanced authentication for protecting Web- based and financial transactions. 
Data Destruction|Data Devices International provides a range of degaussers and data destruction products for physical media. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Consulting|DataEndure provides a portfolio of security, compliance, and archiving solutions for protecting business sensitive information. 
Security Analytics|Dataguise provides discovery, protection, compliance, and related solutions for securing information in Big Data repositories. 
Data Encryption, Data Leakage Prevention|DataLocker provides encryption solutions to protect USB drives, files, and other computing resources. 
Managed Security Services|Datapipe offers a range of managed, hosting, and cloud services, including managed security, compliance, and resale services. 
Data Destruction|Data Security provides products for securely erasing and destroying data stored on hardware media. 
Security Consulting|Datashield provides a range of security consulting, professional services and managed services with emphasis on RSA/EMC products. 
Cloud Security, Application Security, Network Monitoring|DataSunrise offers a a variety of data security products. 
Network Monitoring, Web Fraud Detection, Mobile Security,|DataVisor is fraud and financial crime detection service utilizing unsupervised machine learning to identify attack campaigns before they conduct damage. Headquaters 967 N Shoreline Blvd Mountain View CA 94043 Tel: (408) 331-9886 Executives Yinglian Xie is the CEO of DataVisor. Yinglian has over 10 years of experience in security, specializing in fighting large-scale attacks with AI and Big Data technologies. Fang Yu serves as the CTO of DataVisor. Fang spent 8 years at Microsoft Research developing big-data algorithms and systems. History DataVisor was founded in 2013 by Yinglian Xie and Fang Yu. The company is headquartered in Mountain View, California with offices in Beijing and Shanghai. To date, DataVisor has protected more than 3 billion accounts globally from some of the largest financial institutions and Internet properties in the world, including Pinterest, Yelp, Letgo, Alibaba Group, Dianping, Toutiao, Cheetah Mobile and Tokopedia. Key Competitors SAS, Feedzai, Sift Science Products and Services DataVisor provides the only proven application of unsupervised machine learning (UML) at high accuracy and billion account scale for fraud and financial crimes. The DataVisor Unsupervised Machine Learning Platform uses cutting-edge artificial intelligence and big data technology to detect previously unknown fraud and abuse automatically, without training labels or historical data, and often before damage is done. DataVisor UML enterprise and DataVisor UML Essentials are the two major products of DataVisor. Website http://www.datavisor.com Day Zero Security (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/22/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Security Consulting Brief Overview Day Zero Security provides a range of security services and solutions for customers ranging from residential users to police services. 
Security Consulting|Day Zero Security provides a range of security services and solutions for customers ranging from residential users to police services. 
Application Security, Database Security, Web Application|DBAPPSecurity provides Web application and database security technology solutions 
Database Security, Intrusion Detection/Prevention|DB Networks provides technology solutions to database security issues for organizations. 
Threat Intelligence|Dedrone develops drone detection technology with automated, software-based aeriel intrusion. 
Identity and Access Management|Deep Identity provides a comprehensive identity audit and compliance solution for enterprise customers. 
Endpoint Security, Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Deep Instinct provides real-time detection & prevention solutions for endpoints and mobile using deep learning. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Deepnet Security provides multi-factor authentication and identity and access management solutions. 
Web Security|DeepNines provides a suite of integrated network and Web security products and services. 
Firewall Platform, Data Leakage Prevention, Secure File Sharing|Deep-Secure provides a cyber security guard solution for organizations to securely share information across their network boundary. 
Vulnerability Management|Defence Intelligence (Defintel) combines global threat data, research partnerships, analysis and tools to provide advanced malware solutions for customers. 
Intrusion Detection, Cloud Security|DefenseStorm is a security data platform that watches everything on your network and matches it to your policies. 
Secure File Sharing, Endpoint Security|DefiniSec provides data security and advanced access controls for protecting and sharing sensitive data and content. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Vulnerability Management,|Defensix helps organizations identify real-world threats and prioritize effective mitigation. Defensix unifies over 10 compliance and certification frameworks with the real-world experience of NSA and DoD cyber-operators to provide a focused approach on the aspects of an information security program that make a difference, not merely "check-the-box." 
Security Consulting|Déjà vu Security provides information security research and consulting services for enterprise customers. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Delfigo provides intelligent authentication solutions including multi-factor for mobile devices. 
Penetration Testing, Unified Threat Management, Web|Dell offers a range of computer and technology products and services including data and network security solutions. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|Deloitte is a professional services company that focuses on audit, finance, tax, and consulting, including enterprise risk and compliance services. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Delta ID provides biometric authentication based on iris recognition software for mobile and PC device security. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance,|Delta Risk provides strategic advice, cyber security consulting, and risk management solutions to government and business clients. 
Security Consulting|RiskSonar provides an IT security application and services suite for enterprise customers, including risk management as a service. 
Application Security, Security Training|Denim Group provides secure software capabilities, including application development, assessment, training, and consulting. 
VAR Security Solutions|Denver Cyber Security provides IT security services for customers based on partnerships with Solutionary and Wombat. 
Web Application Firewall|DenyAll provides enterprise CIOs and CISOs with Web application security and vulnerability management solutions. 
Security Consulting|Depth Security provides security consulting with focus on penetration testing, Web application security, and network access control. 
Vulnerability Management|Detectify provides a SaaS capability for analyzing and reporting on the security vulnerabilities of a Website. 
Managed Security Services, Security Consulting, CA/PKI|Deutsche Telekom is a German telecommunications provider offering a range of managed and network-based security services. The company also offers mobile security capabilities as part of its T-Mobile wireless offerings, as well as cyber security through its T Systems unit. 
IoT Security, Hardware/Embedded Security, IoT IAM, Access|Device Authority provides solutions to address the challenges of Identity and Access Management for the Internet of Things (IoT) without human intervention. We help our customers and partners simplify the process of establishing trust for the IoT, enabling end-to-end security architecture and scale for the IoT through our innovative KeyScaler platform. UK Headquarters 2 Arlington Square, Downshire Way, Bracknell, RG12 1WA US Office Device Authority 39300 Civic Center Drive, Suite 180 Fremont, California 94538 info@deviceauthority.com Executives Darron Antill serves as CEO of Device Authority. He was previously CEO of AppSense. Rao Cherukuri serves as CTO of Device Authority. History The private company is headquartered in Bracknell, UK with their Technical Innovation Center in Fremont, California. Device Authority merged with Cryptosoft and operates the joint entity as Device Authority. Key Acquisitions Cryptosoft (2016) – IoT Security Key Competitors RSA Products and Services The Device Authority platform, known as KeyScaler, provides active device authentication and policy enforcement to deliver mission-critical IoT security solutions that can be grouped as follows: • Authentication – Only authorized devices gain access to applications • Data Protection – IoT and M2M data is protected using session-specific and one-time use identification and encryption keys • Credential management (IoT PKI) • Automated password management • Enterprise IoT security The platform offers simplified device provisioning, device-based access protection, and dynamic data protection. Website https://www.deviceauthority.com/ DeviceLock (Alpha Version 0.2 – 06/21/18– No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Endpoint Security, Data Leakage Prevention Brief Overview DeviceLock provides endpoint device and port control and data leak prevention (DLP) software for customers. 
Endpoint Security, Data Leakage Prevention|DeviceLock provides endpoint device and port control and data leak prevention (DLP) software for customers. 
Incident Response|DFLabs S.p.A. develops and delivers an automated incident response technology to a portfolio of enterprise customers 
CA/PKI Solutions|DigiCert is a provider of X.509 SSL cryptographic certificates for Websites and developers. 
Security Consulting, Vulnerability Management, Security|Digital Defense Inc. provides a range of managed and on-demand SaaS risk assessment solutions, as well as security professional services. 
Data Loss Prevention, Endpoint Security|Digital Guardian provides a next generation data protection platform for data loss prevention, advanced threat protection, endpoint detection and response. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Digital Resolve provides solutions for on-line fraud detection and prevention through identity verification. 
VAR Security Solutions|Digital Scepter provides cyber security solutions with emphasis on next-generation firewalls, endpoint security, and Web application security. 
Threat Intelligence|Digital Shadows provides a range of cyber threat intelligence services including information and cyber situational awareness about online exposures. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting|Digivera provides information security, managed services, and technology consulting services. 
Security Recruiting|Direct Recruiters offers a range of search and recruiting services including focus in IT security. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Identity and Access Management|DirectRM provides strong authentication and access management solutions supporting BYOD. 
Routing Security|Dispersive Technologies provides a virtualized network routing solution that increases security for data at rest or in motion. 
Threat Intelligence|Disrupt6 provides threat intelligence based on a subscription feed or from data collected on a deployed sensor network. 
Web Security, Threat Intelligence|Distil Networks protects Websites from botnets, scraping, data mining, and other fraudulent attacks. 
Managed Security Services, Security Consulting|In addition to its digital media, ICT, mobile SaaS, and managed services, DMX Technologies offers a range of managed security solutions and consulting services. 
Threat Intelligence, Infrastructure Security, Brand Protection|DomainTools provides a range of domain, network, and monitoring tools for look-up, research, investigation, and threat intelligence. 
Cloud Security|Dome9 provides a cloud security service focused on server firewalls, Amazon Web Service (AWS) security, cloud network logging, and file integrity monitoring. 
DDOS Security|DOSarrest provides a cloud-based solution for defending Websites from DDOS attacks. 
ICS/IoT Security, Threat Intelligence, Training/Awareness|Dragos, Inc. is a security company that primarily focuses on industrial control systems. 
Application Security|D-Risq provides automated formal analysis tools to improve the correctness of software. 
Infrastructure Security, Managed Services Services, Security|DriveLock SE is a security solutions company located in Germany that specializes in IT and data security. They also offer consulting and managed services. 
Endpoint Security|Druva provides endpoint protection and data governance solutions for enterprise customers. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Dr.Web provides Anti-Virus protection tools and services for a global customer base. 
Endpoint Security, Security Analytics|Dtex Systems provides a platform for using behavioral analytic patters as the basis for detecting endpoint security threats. 
Incident Response|D3 Security provides a platform for incident management and response software. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Duo Security provides a hosted two-factor authentication scheme for the enterprise, including support for mobile users. The company’s Trusted Access offering ensures that only authenticated users and trusted devices can access protected applications, using single sign-on. (OR) Duo Security verifies the identity of users and the hygiene of their devices before they connect to their allowed applications via single sign-on. 
Cloud Security, Security Consulting, ICS/IoT Security|DXC Technology Company, together with its subsidiaries, provides information technology services and solutions primarily in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia. 
Two-Factor Authentication|DynamiCode provides strong authentication and secure mobile POS solutions for verifying identities and protecting assets. 
Mobile Security|eAgency provides mobile security products for consumers, business, and public safety officials. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Secure Exchange|Early Warning provides a trusted payment exchange for financial institutions with authentication and support for compliance. 
Managed Security Services|Earthlink provides Internet services including security services for residential and business customers. 
Data Encryption|east-tec offers encryption-based products that protect sensitive information by secure erasure and other means. 
Cloud Security, Incident Response, Threat Intelligence, Digital|Eastwind Breach Detection is cloud-based breach detection for government and enterprise organizations. Headquaters 2795 East Cottonwood Parkway Suite 360 Salt Lake City, UT 84121 United States Tel: (385) 355-3455 Executives Paul Kraus serves as the CEO of Eastwind Networks. Paul Kraus has more than 25 years of experience and has worked for big companies like Adobe, Symantec and Fidelity at a high post. History The company was formerly known as East Wind Networks, Inc. Eastwind Networks, Inc. was founded in 2014 by Paul Kraus. Key Competitors Netskope, CipherCloud, Zscaller, Securonix Products and Services The company offers Active Breach Detection platform to monitor network, and detect network traffic anomalies and potential breaches. It also offers support services. The company serves government agencies, enterprise IT security teams, and universities and colleges. It offers products through VARs, system integrators, managed service security providers, managed service providers, and corporate resellers. The major cloud products and services offered by EastWind are as follows: • Eastwind and Ixia • Eastwind CloudVu • Eastwind for Saas Website https://www.eastwindnetworks.com Easy Solutions (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/16/18 – Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Fraud intelligence, secure browsing, multi-factor authentication and transaction anomaly detection Brief Overview Easy Solutions is a security provider focused on the comprehensive detection and prevention of electronic fraud across all devices, channels and clouds. 
Fraud intelligence, secure browsing, multi-factor authentication|Easy Solutions is a security provider focused on the comprehensive detection and prevention of electronic fraud across all devices, channels and clouds. 
Email Security, Data Encryption|Echoworx provides secure messaging, document delivery, and collaboration solutions for business customers. 
Threat Intelligence|EclecticIQ, formerly Intelworks, provides a threat management platform for analysis and integration of multi-source intelligence. 
Email Security, Web Security|EdgeWave provides a suite of security product solutions for network, email, Web, and cloud. 
Security Analytics|E8 Security provides a behavioral analytics platformcalled Fusion to support the detection of threats in the enterprise. 
Security Recruiting|Egon Zehnder offers a range of executive search, recruiting, and consultation services for clients around the world. 
Data Encryption|EgoSecure provides data protection solutions based on encryption, control, filtering, and management. 
Email Security, Secure File Sharing, Governance, Risk, and|Egress helps enterprises protect unstructured data to meet compliance requirements and drive business productivity. The company’s AI-based platform empowers users to control and secure the data they share. 
Wireless Security|802 Secure provides wireless security through solutions that combine software defined radios with Big Data analytics. 
Cloud Security|Elastic builds software to make data usable in real time and at scale for search logging, security, and analytics use cases. 
Digital Forensics|ElcomSoft provides a range of digital forensic, corporate security, and IT audit products for tasks such as password recovery. 
Cloud Security, Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Elemental Security provides data security and governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) management solutions for enterprise customers. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Vulnerability Management, Managed|ElevenPaths provides a range of security products and services including authentication and vulnerability detection. 
Bitcoin Security|Elliptic provides secure storage services for Bitcoin currency. 
Security Consulting, Incident Response|Emagined Security provides professional consulting services for information security and compliance. 
Web Fraud Prevention, Email Security, GRC Platform|Emailage is a fraud detection company that generates risk scores associated with email addresses based on their transaction histories. 
VAR Security Solutions|eMazzanti technologies provides IT technology consultation services for business including various IT security services. 
Network Monitoring, Unified Threat Management, Security|Empow Cyber Security deconstructs your existing security tools into their individual components. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Emsisoft provides anti-malware scanning and removal software to clean infect personal computers. 
Digital Forensics, Incident Response|Enclave Forensics provides incident response and digital forensic services for enterprise customers. 
Security Analytics, Incident Response, SIEM, Security Analytics,|Encode provides a security analytics and response orchestration platform for the enterprise. 
Data Encryption|Encryptics provides a data privacy and protection software platform including encryption that can be embedded into applications and processes. 
Security Analytics, Endpoint Security|Endgame provides offensive and defensive cyber security research including a platform for enterprise threat and vulnerability detection and mitigation. 
Firewall Platform, Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Network|Endian provides unified threat management (UTM) solutions such as firewall, IPS, NAC, and Web/email filtering with emphasis on securing Internet of Things (IoT). 
Security Consulting, ICS/IoT Security, Mobile Security|Enet 1 Group provides security professional services in the areas of SCADA and critical infrastructure, and mobility. 
Information Assurance|Engility is a US government defense contractor providing a range of intelligence and engineering services including cyber security/information assurance. 
Voice Security, Data Leakage Prevention, ICS/IoT Security|Enigmedia provides solutions for secure calls and encrypted telepresence. Enigmedia also provides solutions for data access, control, and traceability management. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Vulnerability Management,|enSilo provides data exfiltration detection solutions for enterprise customers experiencing a breach. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance, Digital Forensics,|Enterprise Risk Management provides a range of security consulting and training services including risk management and IT security. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Mobile Security|Entersekt provides interactive authentication and encryption solutions using mobile devices. 
Two-Factor Authentication, CA/PKI Solutions, Data Encryption,|Entrust Datacard provides a suite of authentication, identity, PKI, certificate, and mobile security solutions. 
Data Encryption|Enveil is a data encryption company that offers customers the ability to perform searches and analytics on the data without decrypting. 
Infrastructure Security, Managed Security Svcs|ePlus Security, a network security engineering and integration company, designs, builds, optimizes, and secures network infrastructures for middle market to enterprise customers. 
Security R&D, Security Consulting|ERNW is an independent IT security services and consultation company specializing in knowledge transfer. 
VAR Security Solns, Managed Security Svcs, Firewall Platform,|eSecurity Solutions provides value added security and networking solutions including IT security consultation. 
Security Analytics, Network Monitoring, Vulnerability|eSentire provides active enterprise cyber security threat protection solutions including vulnerability scanning, log data centralization, and network traffic capture for forensic analysis. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Endpoint Security, Mobile Security|ESET provides anti-virus and Internet security software for end- user PCs and mobiles. 
Security Information Event Management|EventSentry provides a range of monitoring tools focused on log files, reporting, heath, and compliance. 
Threat Intelligence, Web Fraud Prevention|EverCompliant Ltd. provides cyber risk intelligence and merchant fraud prevention detection solutions. 
Identity and Access Management|Evidian provides identity and access management solutions for enterprise customers in Europe and beyond. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance|EWA-Canada provides information assurance services in Canada including IT risk management and managed security services. 
Security Analytics, Security Information Event Management,|Exabeam provides security intelligence and management solutions to help enterprises protect their most valuable information. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Data Leakage Prevention|Exonar specializes in next generation data leakage prevention and GDPR compliance. 
Identity and Access Management, Secure File Sharing|Exostar provides cloud-based identity credentialing and access products, as well as secure collaboration solutions. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Experian is a global credit services company that includes fraud prevention solutions via acquisition of 41st Parameter. 
Network Monitoring|ExtraHop sells network appliances that perform real-time analysis of wire data. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Network Access Control,|Extreme Networks provides a range of advanced network monitoring, network management, SDN, and security solutions. 
Security Consulting|EY offers a full range of business advisory services including a cyber security consulting practice. 
Data Leakage Prevention Systems, Data Encryption, Content|Factom Harmony is a blockchain base document technology that works with existing imaging or document management solution to create a secure, transparent, unalterable record for the final loan documents. 
Application Security, Cloud Security, DDOS Security, Network|F5 provides a range of products focused on network security and optimizing the application delivery network capabilities of an enterprise or service provider. 
Threat Intelligence, Infrastructure Security|Farsight Security provides threat intelligence feeds from real-time passive DNS solutions. 
Data Encryption, Content Protection|Fasoo provides a variety of data security and enterprise DRM solutions for files and other resources. 
Incident Response|Fast Orientation provides software that allows IT organizations to explore IT events in real time as part of a continuous awareness and incident response program. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Fastpath offers solutions for security, audit, and compliance management of ERP systems. 
Web Fraud Prevention, Vulnerability Management|Feedzai is a data science company that detects fraud in omnichannel commerce. The company uses real-time, machine learning to analyze big data to identify fraudulent payment transactions and minimize risk in the financial industry. 
Two-Factor Authentication|FEITIAN provides digital security through a range of product offerings for authentication, encryption, and related technologies. 
Data Encryption, Content Protection, Password/Privilege Mgmt|Fhoosh is a data encryption and storage company that boasts high speed data storage and security solutions against ransomware. 
Threat Intelligence|FICO (Fair Isaac Corporation) delivers predictive analytics solutions that drive smarter decisions. The Company’s solutions include the FICO Score — the standard measure of consumer credit risk in the United States — along with solutions for managing credit accounts, identifying and minimizing the impact of fraud, and customizing consumer offers with pinpoint accuracy. FICO's streaming analytics provide an additional layer of protection to detect emerging threats based on machine learning and self-calibrating approaches. FICO has leveraged extensive IP assets from its banking technology for the creation of a Cyber Solution that is highly differentiated from current industry offerings and is complementary to existing infrastructures and investments. 
Automated Detection and Response, Deception Technology,|Fidelis is the industry’s only completely integrated, automated network and endpoint detection and response platform. Fidelis is engineered for visibility, designed for response and trusted by the most important brands in the world. 
Secure File Sharing, CA/PKI Solutions|FileOpen provides digital rights management solutions for enterprise files and document types. 
Secure File Sharing, Content Protection|FinalCode provides an encryption-based solution for secure file sharing in enterprise. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Fingerprint Cards AB is an authentication company based in Sweden. Fingerprint Cards AB primarily uses biometrics, such as fingerprinting, as a form of authentication. 
Network Access Control, Threat Detection, GRC, Mobile|Finjan provides software and hardware technologies capable of proactively detecting previously unknown and emerging threats on a real-time, behavior-based basis. Headquaters 2000 University Avenue Suite 600 East Palo Alto, CA 94303 Tel: (650) 282-3228 Executives Phil Hartstein is President and Chief Executive Officer of Finjan Holdings, Inc. Mr. Hartstein has worked in a number of technology and intellectual property related roles for over a decade. History In 1995, Shlomo Touboul, Finjan's founder and lead inventor on a number of our patents, became intrigued with the Java programming language. Shlomo realized the existing security software would not be able to contain or protect against the possible threats to a computer using Java. Founded in 1997, Finjan has generated more than $350M in income from the licensing of its intellectual property. In November 2009 the hardware and software divisions of Finjan were sold to M86 Security, a global computer security firm based in Orange, California with international headquarters in London and offices worldwide. M86 was subsequently acquired by Trustwave, who still use Finjan's technology patents under a licensing agreement. Key Acquisitions Alchemedia Technologies(2002) – DRM Key Competitors FortScale, Securonix, Exabeam Products and Services Finjan owns and licenses patents on various cybersecurity processes to providers of enterprise-level network security solutions. Finjan’s cybersecurity business includes a wide range of services including IP Licensing, Cybersecurity Consulting Services, Mobile Applications, as well as Investments in Innovation. Portfolio of cybersecurity patents resulting from $65M in R&D and in-house product development. Website https://www.finjan.com/ Finsphere Acquired by Visa (Alpha Version 0.2 – 06/09/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Two-Factor Authentication Brief Overview Finsphere provides solutions for using mobile devices for establishing identity and authentication. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Finsphere provides solutions for using mobile devices for establishing identity and authentication. 
Vulnerability Management|As part of its voice and video performance offerings, Firebind provides a passive, continuous network security and performance- monitoring tool. 
VAR Security Solutions|FireCompass is an AI Assistant for Seccurity teams to help them prioritize security investments & simplify security buying. 
Incident Response, Security Analytics, Network Monitoring,|FireEye offers a range of advanced threat prevention, security analytics, and attack mitigation solutions and platforms. 
Endpoint Security|Fireglass isolates browser and endpoint sessions using a virtual platform. 
Cloud Security|FireLayers provides a cloud access security broker (CASB) for extending the perimeter to allow access to cloud-resident apps. 
Vulnerability Management|FireMon provides a security management platform with advanced security intelligence capabilities for enterprise, government, and service provider customers. 
Identity and Access Management, Password/Privilege|Fischer International provides cloud-based identity and management solutions for enterprise customers. 
Cloud Security, Web Application Firewall|5nine provides a range of Microsoft cloud and virtualization management and security applications. 
Network Monitoring|Flowmon provides network monitoring and security solutions for the enterprise. 
Network Monitoring, PCI-DSS/Compliance|FlowTraq provides insight, visibility, protection, and understanding of network infrastructures. 
Threat Intelligence|Flashpoint provides Business Risk Intelligence (BRI) to public and private sector organizations to provide a decision advantage over threats and adversaries. 
Cloud Security|FlawCheck provides a cyber security platform that offers malware security protection for Linux containers. 
Security Information Event Management, Security Analytics|Fluency, formerly SecurityDo, provides a product called Fluency that provides breach detection and response capabilities. 
Penetration Testing, PCI DSS Compliance,|Focal Point Data Risk, LLC, a risk management firm, provides cybersecurity, identity governance and access management, data privacy, analytics, internal audit, and training services to business and government customers in North America. 
Data Loss Prevention, Security Analytics, Cloud Security, Web|Forcepoint offers web and email content security, security for the Cloud (including Office 365 deployments), Insider Threat and Data Protection solutions that leverage advanced analytics and user behavior monitoring, and network security solutions. More than 20,000 organizations around the world rely on Forcepoint security solutions to protect their users, data and networks against the most determined adversaries. 
Forensics, PCI DSS Compliance|Foregenix Ltd. provides forensic investigations, cardholder data discovery, information security, and compliance services for the payment card industry (PCI). 
Network Access Control|ForeScout provides pervasive network security through continuous monitoring and access control of endpoints, network users, and applications. 
Identity and Access Management|ForgeRock offers a suite of open identity and access management tools for enterprise, cloud, social, and mobile systems. 
Data Encyryption|Fornetix offers an encryption management software allowing organizations to orchestrate automated and optimized policy and identity enforcement across thousands of encryption keys. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|Fortalice provides security consultation and training services for business and government. 
Application Security, Penetration Testing, Digital Forensics|Fortego provides computer network operations (CNO) software development, reverse engineering, and cyber security analysis services. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Forter provides solutions for prevention of on-line fraud through behavioral analytics and other heuristic means. 
Firewall Platform, Unified Threat Management, Email Security,|Fortinet offers a wide range of security fabric platform solutions including its flagship next-generation firewall for enterprise protection. 
Digital Forensics, Incident Response|4Discovery provides a range of digital forensics services including mobile forensics, remote forensic collection, computer analysis, and reporting. 
Unified Threat Management, Threat Intelligence|4iQ monitors thousands of dark web sites, hacktivism forums, and black markets daily for stolen credentials, leaked personal information, and confidential documents. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance, Data Destruction,|4Secure provides security consulting and training services to corporate and public sector clients across Europe. The company also provides a hardware data erasure tool. 
Cloud Security, Web Application Firewall|As part of its API and cloud gateway technologies, Forum Systems provides identity management and SSL proxy solutions for cloud storage. 
GRC|FrameCyber is a full service GRC platform that includes functions for cybersecurity risk assessment, event tracking, issue management, organization inventory, control inventory, risk registration, risk analysis, risk reporting, risk measures and metrics, and associated correlation of information and data in those domains required to perform cybersecurity risk management. 
Web Fraud Prevention|FraudCracker provides a platform that reduces the risk of fraud through anonymous employee reporting. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, PCI-DSS/Compliance,|FRSecure provides a range of security consulting services including assessments, audits, strategic security, and virtual CISO. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Mobile Security, VPN/Secure Access,|F-Secure provides a range of anti-virus, Internet security, and mobile security products for companies and individuals. 
Security Consulting, Digital Forensics|FTI is a global business advisory company with a practice in forensic consulting and eDiscovery services. 
Data Encryption|Futurex provides secure data encryption and key management solutions available in hardware or software. 
Firewall Platform, Data Leakage Prevention, Cloud Security|GajShield provides a range of network security products including next generation firewalls, DLP, and cloud security. 
Data Encryption|Galaxkey provides an encryption platform enabling users to encrypt all email and file data. 
Security R&D, Security Consulting|As part of its computer science and mathematics services, Galois provides R&D in several areas of computer security. 
Data Destruction|Garner Products provides a range of degaussers and data destruction products for physical media. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Web Security, Intrusion|Based in London, Garrison develops technologies for enterprise cyber security needs. The company is focused on developing a highly effective anti-malware solution for enterprise cyber defences. 
Unified Threat Management, Firewall Platform|The suite of security solutions offered by gateprotect includes unified threat management (UTM) appliances, next generation firewalls, and VPNs products. 
Managed Security Services|GBProtect is a managed security service provider offering security operations and applications management as well as consulting. 
Application Security, Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC)|GB & Smith provides solutions for administering and managing security policies on enterprise applications such as SAP and Oracle. 
Anti-Malware Tools|G DATA offers a suite of anti-virus and Internet security solutions for enterprise customers and individuals. 
Mobile Security, Embedded Security, CA/PKI Solutions,|Gemalto provides a range of digital security solutions ranging from biometrics, to subscriber identity module (SIM) card development, to protection of near-field communication (NFC). 
Information Assurance, Voice Security, Security Consulting|As part of its comprehensive portfolio focused on government agencies, General Dynamics provides cyber security and information assurance products and services. 
Network Access Control|Genians reimagines Network Access Control (NAC) for the IoT era. 
Data Leakage Prevention|GeoLang offers a suite of cyber security solutions including the Ascema DLP platform. 
Email Security, Anti-Malware Tools, Data Leakage Prevention,|GFI Software offers IT products and services including email security services and managed anti-virus. 
Network Monitoring|Gigamon provides a range of network monitoring, analytics, and management solutions including security. 
VAR Security Solutions|GigaNetworks provides value added resale (VAR) security solutions to businesses with emphasis on the Florida enterprise marketplace. 
Email Security, Data Encryption, Content Protection|GigaTrust provides enterprise rights management solutions built on the foundation of Microsoft’s Rights Management Services (RMS). 
Email Security|Glasswall provides email security protection that analyzes file extensions and for security implications. 
Network Monitoring|Glimmerglass provides solutions for collecting actionable security intelligence directly from optical networks. 
Security Consulting|Global Cyber Risk (GCR) provides advisory services to business and government in privacy, security, and related areas. 
Cloud Security, Identity and Access Management|Global Data Sentinel provides data security for any cloud service provider, including private networks, making a platform able to fit in to any existing enterprise network solution. 
Digital Forensics|Global Digital Forensics provides a range of digital forensic and eDiscovery software and services. 
Security Training|In addition to IT, business, and project training, Global Knowledge offers a cyber security training portfolio including support for certifications and product-specific skills. 
Security Training|Global Learning Systems provides a range of security awareness and customized eLearning services. 
Secure File Sharing|Globalscape supports managed, secure file transfer solutions for enterprise. 
CA/PKI Solutions|GlobalSign is a certification authority providing PKI-based products and services for enterprise, business, and service providers. 
Identity and Access Management|Gluu provides an open source or on demand, standards-based identity and access management capability for enterprise. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services, PCI-|GM Security Technologies provides business solutions primarily in Puerto Rico, the Caribbean and Latin America. 
Web Application Firewall, Web Security Gateway|GoDaddy Inc. designs and develops cloud-based technology products for small businesses, Web design professionals, and individuals in the United States and internationally. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance|Good Harbor Security Risk Management provides a range of consulting services focused on risk, threat, strategy, governance, and management. 
Identity and Access Management, Cloud Security, Infrastructure|Google provides a range of identity, cloud, email, and infrastructure security solutions as part of its search, email, operating system, cloud, and virtual services. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, VAR/Security Solutions|GoSecure provides a range of security consulting and managed security services. 
Application Security|GrammaTech offers software-development tools and application security measures that are used by startups, Fortune 500 companies, educational institutions, and government. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Training, GRC|The GRC Group provides GRC training, certification, and resources for enterprise professionals. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Training|GRC 20/20 Research provides research, workshops, and consulting support in the area of GRC for enterprise. 
Endpoint Security, Network Access Control|Great Bay Software provides endpoint solutions for discovery, management, and protection. 
Cloud Security, Email Security|GreatHorn is a cybersecurity solution for cloud communication infrastructure, including email, collaboration, and chat tools. 
ICS/IoT Security|Green Hills Software is an embedded software provider with solutions for ICS, IoT, and other embedded devices. 
Network Monitoring|GreeNet Information Service provides advanced traffic inspection for network monitoring and security. 
GRC, Security Training|GreyCastle Security is a service provider dedicated exclusively to cybersecurity and the practical management of cybersecurity risks. 
Penetration Testing, Security Training|Grid32 provides a range of security services including penetration testing and vulnerability assessment. 
Data Leakage Prevention, Vulnerability Management, PCI|GroundLabs provides software tools for sensitive data discovery to support compliance and avoid breaches. 
Application Security|Groundworks Technologies provides engineering and assessment services including reverse engineering and embedded device security. 
Data Loss Prevention, Endpoint Protection, Cloud Data Security,|GTB Technologies, Inc. a Newport Beach California cyber security company that focuses on providing enterprise class data protection and data loss prevention solutions for data within an organization, for data in the cloud and for data protection outside the organization. 
Security Analytics, Web Fraud Prevention|Guardian Analytics provides a behavioral analytic-based solution for detecting fraudulent activity in financial systems. 
Data Destruction|Guardian Data Destruction offers a range of on-site data destruction and degaussing services. 
Cloud Security|GuardiCore provides real-time threat detection and mitigation via SDN with the intent of protecting the enterprise datacenter from APT attacks. 
Mobile Security|GuardSquare provides optimization and obfuscation software for Android and iOS. 
Data Encryption|Guardtime provides a family of security solutions based on its keyless signature infrastructure (KSI) that enable data integrity, protection, and governance through block chain. 
Digital Forensics, Endpoint Security, Incident Response|Guidance Software provides solutions for digital investigations, governance and compliance, data discovery, data risk management, and endpoint detection and response. 
VAR Security Solutions, GRC Platform|GuidePoint Security provides customized, innovative information security solutions for its customers using a range of technology partners. 
Security Consulting|Guidepost Solutions provides a range of consulting services including investigation, compliance, and monitoring. The company has expertise in the installation of physical security. 
Security Analytics|GuruCul provides an identity-centric, behavioral risk analysis platform that uses Big Data and machine security analytics. 
Bug Bounty Support, Vulnerability Coordination, Vulnerability|HackerOne provides a range of bug bounty services for enterprise customers. More than 1,000 organizations, including the U.S. Department of Defense, U.S. General Service Administration, General Motors, Google Play, Twitter, GitHub, Nintendo, Panasonic Avionics, Qualcomm, Starbucks, Dropbox, and the CERT Coordination Center trust HackerOne to find critical software vulnerabilities. HackerOne is headquartered in San Francisco with offices in London, New York, and the Netherlands. 
Digital Forensics, Penetration Testing, Bug Bounty Support|Hacking Team provides offensive security solutions for the law enforcement and intelligence communities. 
Penetration Testing, Security Training|HackLabs provides a range of security consulting and training services including penetration testing. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, PCI DSS/Compliance|Halock Security Labs provides security consulting services including penetration testing and security assessment. 
Email Security|Halon provides a secure SMTP (email) platform for service providers. 
Unified Threat Management, Threat Intelligence|HanSight is a Chinese threat detection and intelligence company that offers products on a wide variety of platforms. 
Security Analytics, ICS/IoT Security|Happiest Minds technologies provides a range of solutions, including security, for IoT, Big Data analytics, software-defined data center, and cloud computing. 
VAR Security Solutions|HardSecure provides values added resale (VAR) security solutions including consulting. 
Information Assurance|Harris provides communications and IT products and services, including communications security products, with emphasis on government. 
Security Analytics|Hawk Network Defense provides security analytics for enterprise, service providers, and SIEM enrichment. 
Security Analytics, Threat Intelligence|Haystax provides actionable security intelligence and real-time situational awareness. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|H-Bar Cyber Solutions provides a rage of security consulting, compliance, and security training services. 
Application Security|HDIV Security provides software for runtime application self- protection (RASP). 
Penetration Testing|Hedgehog security provides a range of penetration testing and security research services. 
Security Recruiting|Heidrick & Struggles provides senior leadership-level search and recruitment including CISO and CSO positions. 
Infrastructure Security, PCI-DSS/Compliance, Security|HelpSystems is an IT software company, working in the areas of systems and network management, business intelligence, and security and compliance. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services, PCI|The Herjavec Group is a Canadian technology firm specializing in network security managed services and consulting. 
Data Destruction|HSD is a manufacturer of information destruction devices including degaussers, data disintegrators, and data erasers. 
Incident Response|Hexadite provides an automated incident response solution based on intelligent algorithms and tools. 
Application Security|HexaTier, formerly GreenSQL, provides a database application security solution for data masking, compliance, and database threat protection. 
Security Consulting|Hex Security provides security and information assurance consultation services toward both strategic and compliance objectives. 
Identity and Access Management, Hardware/Embedded Security,|HID Global provides a range of identity and access solutions including smart cards, readers, RFID tags, and software. 
Penetration Testing|High-Tech Bridge is a Swiss company offering penetration testing and related forensic and audit services. 
Firewall Platform|Hillstone Networks provides a behavioral analytic-based next generation firewall platform. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Hiperos provides risk, compliance, and performance solutions for managing third parties. 
Identity and Access Management|Hitachi ID Systems, Inc. is a provider of identity management and access governance solutions. 
Managed Security Services, PCI DSS/Compliance, Security|Above Security delivers customized managed and IT security services including NIDS, HIDS, and log analysis for protecting enterprise customer infrastructure. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Hitec Labs provides service and platform support for GRC and enterprise risk management. 
Secure Remote Access|HOB includes cyber security offerings for secure remote access and connectivity. 
Content Protection, Secure File Sharing|HoGo provides a digital rights management (DRM)-based solution for protecting and sharing documents. 
Security Consulting, Threat Intelligence|Hold Security is an information security and investigations company providing consulting services and threat intelligence for business clients. 
Intrusion Dection/Prevention|HoloNet Security offers real-time breach detection for sensitive business data. 
Security Information Event Management, Email Security,|HPE is a multinational information technology company that sells a range of different products and services including IT, enterprise, and network security. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Mobile Security, VPN/Secure|Huawei is a global ICT provider offers a range of network security products. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Humming Heads provides a range of anti-virus and Internet security products including a corporate security platform. 
Security Information Event Management|Huntsman Security is an information security software company which provides solutions to organisations to enable the collection, analysis and alerting/reporting on systems, user and applications activity logs, audit trails and event data. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Brand Protection|Hypersecu Information Systems provides multi-factor authentication and public key infrastructure, as well as software copyright protection. 
Decentralized Authentication|Endpoint Security, Cloud Security|Hysolate Ltd. develops endpoint solution for desktop management which also increases business productivity. 
Cloud Security|HyTrust provides encryption-based security solutions for enterprise customers using cloud services. 
Security Training|IANS offers general and customized information security training and education through a range of events and services. Industry experts participate as faculty 
Web Security|The security solutions offered by iboss include a Web Security Platform supporting layered APT and mobility defense products. 
Identity and Access Management, Mainframe Security, Security|IBM is a global technology and consulting company, including a range of security products and services. 
ICS/IoT Security, Mobile Security, Hardware/Embedded Security|Icon Labs secures the Internet of Things (IoT) by providing portable software to protect embedded devices with firewall, access, and network management. 
Attack Detection/Prevention|Idappcon provides IDS and gateway solutions for evaluating the effectiveness of attack detection tools in the enterprise. 
Two-Factor Authentication|ID Control provides a range of strong authentication and encryption products for securing business access, transactions, and authorization. 
Two-Factor Authentication, ICS/IoT Security, GRC Platform|IDEMIA is an authentication company based in France that uses biometric data as a means of authentication and identification. 
Identity and Access Management|Identacor provides a cloud-based identity and access management solution for corporate Web applications. 
Identity and Access Management|IDentia provides identity and access management, as well as cloud security products and services. 
Identity and Access Management|Identiv provides products for identity and smart card access including credentials, RFID support, and readers. 
Incident Response, Digital Forensics|ID Experts provides solutions to support privacy incident response in sector such as medical and healthcare. 
Managed Security Services|Igloo is a Korean company that provides managed security services including SIEM management. 
Security Analytics|IKANOW provides Big Data analytic solutions to reduce the risk of breaches and APT attacks. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Ikarus provides security software to prevent viruses and to secure mobility and cloud computing. 
Cloud Security|Illumio builds a cloud-based platform for securing application workloads using virtualized protections. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Illusive utilizes deception-based technology to detect and disrupt advanced threats in enterprise networks at the earliest stage in their lifecycle. 
Two-Factor Authentication|ImageWare provides a range of biometric solutions to support authentication and identity management. 
Web Security, Web Application Firewall, Cloud Security, DDOS|Imperva provides a range of Web application, database, file, and cloud security products for protecting business critical data and applications. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Imprivata provides authentication, single-sign-on, and password management solutions, with emphasis on health care. 
Network Access Control, Endpoint Security, Software Defined|Impulse provides a solution called SafeConnect that manages network access policies and endpoint security with emphasis on both enabling secure BYOD and preventing unauthorized accesst to network resources. Impulse has recently launched SafeConnect Software Defined Perimeter (SDP), providing secure multi-cloud access leveraging zero-trust technology. 
Anti-Malware Tools|INCA Internet is a Korean software company, also known as nProtect in the US that includes a line of security products such as anti-virus. 
Security Consulting|Include Security offers information and application security assessment, advisory, and consulting services. 
ICS/IoT Security|Indegy provides full visibility into ICS networks, identifying changes to critical controllers, including change to firmware, logic, and configuration updates. 
Web Application Firewall, Application Security, Vulnerability|Indusface offers a suite of Web application firewall (WAF), and Web and mobile application testing products. 
VAR Security Solutions|Infinigate is a value added distributor in the UK for a set of security services from companies such as Corero, Dell, and Trustwave. 
Data Encryption, Data Access Control|InfoAssure provides a crypto labeling solution for data owners to persistently protect their digital assets through a combination of cryptography and policy/role/content-based access controls. N2K provides both object level protection and access control in one unified application. Its crypto labeling platform called Need2Know® (N2K) empowers the data owner to control who can see what data on which device when and where even in the cloud. 
Infrastructure Security, Threat Intelligence|Infoblox provides solutions for secure DNS as well as related network services, cloud, and virtualization. 
Vulnerability Management|Infocyte offers intrusion assessments, malware hunting, and threat engagement services. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance|InfoDefense provides security consultation services focused on regulatory compliance, information assurance, and response. 
Network Access Control|InfoExpress provides network access control product solutions for enterprise customers. 
Threat Intelligence, Data Leakage Prevention|InfoArmor provides solutions for employee identity protection and advanced threat intelligence to help organizations protect their assets. 
VAR Security Solutions|Infogressive provides a range of managed and professional security services for enterprise customers. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting|InfoGuard provides ICT security products, professional services, and managed security for business customers. 
VAR Security Solutions|infoLock provides information security consulting, integration, and value added resale (VAR) services. 
Security Analytics, Security Consulting|Informatica provides a range of Big Data solutions including a data security offering focused on critical data intelligence. 
Data Encryption, Secure File Sharing|The Infosec Global platform enables the interoperability of standard, custom, and multi-crypto solutions with a real- time service that remotely manages the cryptography of critical systems 
Mainframe Security|InfoSec provides a range of security products and services for mainframe computer systems. 
Security Training|InfoSec Institute offers a variety of information security training courses, certifications, and boot camps. 
Security Training|InfoSec Skills is a UK-based cyber and ICT security training and education organization. 
Security Awareness Training|InfoSecure provides security training and consultation in the area of information security awareness. 
Security Consulting|Infosys provides IT consulting, technology and outsourcing services including a range of information security solutions. 
Data Leakage Protection, Security Consulting|InfoWatch is a group of information security companies – InfoWatch, Kribrum, EgoSecure, and Appercut – that operates across Eastern and Western Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. 
Embedded Security, Identity Protection, Web Security|Ingenico is provider of retail payment solutions for merchants with emphasis on security across different channels. 
Security Consulting|InGuardians is a vendor-independent security consultancy offering audit, penetration testing, and related services. 
Cloud Security, Security Consulting, Data Encryption,|Innové is a cybersecurity company that provides a range of security solutions aimed at consulting, learning and technology. 
Hardware/Embedded Security, Content Protection|Inside Secure provides a range of embedded security solutions for mobile payment, content protection, secure access, and IoT. 
Security Training, PCI-DSS/Compliance|Inspired eLearning provides security awareness and compliance training offerings. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Intego offers an award-winning line of products providing Mac security and enhancing Mac performance. 
Mobile Security|IntegriCell offers a range of expert professional services in the area of mobility security. 
PCI-DSS/Compliance, Unified Threat Management, Managed|InteliSecure is a security company that offers security solutions, managed solutions, and security assessments. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting|Intellect Security provides value added data security and encryption solutions for enterprise and cloud using a network of partners. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|IntelleSecure provides training and consulting services in GRC and information security management. 
Endpoint Security|Intelligent ID provides an endpoint monitoring and protection solution that provides continuous security. 
Secure Access, Mobile Security|Intelligo provides a secure mobile enablement platform for authentication, device management, and network access control. 
Data Encryption|InterCrypto provides data encryption tools for files, disks, and media. 
Endpoint Security, Security Analytics|InterGuard, a solution of Awareness Technologies, provides employee-monitoring software that records and controls PC activity for loss and misuse. 
Security Consulting|Interhack provides a range of computer-related professional services with emphasis on security assessments. 
Security Training|InterNetwork Defense partners with Test Pass Academy to offer a series of cyber security training including CISSP preparation. 
Security Analytics, Endpoint Security|Interset provides tracking and audit control over intellectual property by endpoint behavioral analytics. 
Data Encryption, Content Protection|Intertrust Technologies is a software technology company that specializes in trusted distributed computing. It invents, develops and licenses software, technologies, and services in the areas of application shielding, content protection, data governance, digital rights management (DRM), media monetization, PKI certificate services, and whitebox cryptography. 
Unified Threat Management, Vulnerability Management|Intezer is a threat detection company that uses a ‘DNA mapping’ approach to detection. 
Secure File Sharing|Intralinks provides solutions for secure collaboration and virtual information sharing. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting|Intrinium offers, in addition to cloud and network services, a range of cyber security consulting and managed security services. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Intrusion Inc. provides enterprise security products for Internet monitoring and network data capture. 
Security Consulting, Security Recruting, Training|Invictus International provides balanced and holistic security solutions for the public and private sectors through first obtaining a comprehensive understanding of threats, risks and vulnerabilities relative to the capabilities, challenges and needs of the client. Headquaters 5030 S Decatur Blvd Las Vegas, NV 89118 Tel: (702) 629-3971 Executives Micahel Holding is the General Manager of Invictus International. History Invictus International has full time operations headquartered in Orange County, CA and Las Vegas, NV. The company was started in early 2016 as a means of expanding on the success of servicing choice close/executive protection contracts (Outside of Continental U.S. and in California). The core team started with retired and active Marines from the Reconnaissance and Raider (MARSOC) communities. Key Competitors Atum IT, Invictus Consulting llc Products and Services Invictus International provides Training and Protection services and Rsik management solutions. Invictus International offers wide ranging security service solutions for government, enterprise, individual and residential. Offerings and Partnered Offerings include: • Static Site and Transportation Security • Secured Courier Transport Service • Active Surveillance Monitoring • Risk and Threat Vulnerability Assessments (full- scope and compartment) • Penetration Testing and “Red-Cell” Operations • Emergency Response Planning (Development and Sustainability) • Advanced Logistics with route and site reconnaissance/analysis • Training Site Logistical Support • Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Commercial Services • Start-Up and new market security consulting services • State and Municipal Compliance Consultation and Facilitation • Establishing best-practices and first-principals in safety and security in advancing markets Website http://www.invictusops.com iTrust (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/21/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Consulting, Penetration Testing Brief Overview iTrust provides penetration testing and various products and services for vulnerability management. 
Consulting, Penetration Testing|iTrust provides penetration testing and various products and services for vulnerability management. 
Security Consulting, Security R&D, ICS/IoT Security|IOActive provides a range of security hardware and software assessments and research services. 
Data Security, Data Encryption|Ionic Security provides a unified cloud and mobility-based security platform focused on data protection, single sign-on, and analytics. 
Web Fraud Prevention, Two-Factor Authentication|iovation provides an on-line fraud prevention platform based on authentication via device recognition and reputation. 
VAR Security Solutions|IPS is a Canadian value added reseller (VAR) of cyber security products and services. 
Secure File Sharing|Ipswitch provides a platform for secure, managed file transfer as well as solutions for managing networks and mail servers. 
Security Consulting|IPV Security provides a range of security consulting services focused on compliance, monitoring, management, and audit. 
Secure File Sharing, Data Leakage Prevention|IRM Secure provides security solutions for information usage control, information rights management (IRM), and secure outsourcing. 
Data Destruction|Iron Mountain provides records management, data backup, and data destruction solutions for the enterprise. 
Network Monitoring, Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Threat|IronNet provides cyber defense using complex behavioral modeling, big-data analytics, and advanced computing capabilities to deliver unprecedented network visibility, early threat detection, and targeted, business-informed mitigation actions and also provides for collective defense by sharing and correlating threat and event data across multiple companies and sectors. 
Threat Intelligence, Security and Awareness Training, Email|IRONSCALES is a comprehensive phishing mitigation solution designed to protect your enterprise from cyber-attacks. Based on a gamified training program and a unique crowd-wisdom approach, the IronTraps automatic mitigation response is immediately executed when a phishing attack is reported by employees. 
SDN Security, Cloud Security|IronSDN provides continuous compliance and security protections for software-defined networks (SDNs). 
Vulnerability Management, Incident Response|ISARR provides a Web-based platform for managing risk, resilience, response, and security intelligence. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|i-Sprint Innovations provides identity, credential, and access management solutions. 
Mobile Security|ITADSecurity offers a security risk intelligence solution for mobile device endpoints. 
VAR Security Services|ITC Secure Networking is a UK-based network and security integrator including management services from the company’s SOC. 
VAR Security Solutions|IT2Trust is a Scandinavian value added distributor of IT and network security solutions. 
Endpoint Security, Data Leakage Prevention|itWatch provides a suite of IT security products focused on DLP, endpoint security, device security, encryption, and other areas. 
Identity and Access Management, Vulnerabilit and Patch|iVanti provides various IT services to help your organization keep track of user information, IT assets, and more. 
Identity and Access Management|iWelcome provides on-premise and cloud-based identity and access management solutions for European companies and governments. 
Security Testing, Penetration Testing|Ixia offers a range of network testing and visibility products including network security testing. 
Data Security, Email Security|janusNET provides data protections products focused on classification, filtering, and control. 
Security Analytics|Jask provides an artificial intelligence-based platform for security analytics. 
Network Access Control|Javelin Networks protects the corporate domain from APTs. 
Identity and Access Management|Jericho Systems provides a suite of tools for establishing attribute-based access controls and authorizations for the enterprise or service provider environment. 
Secure File Sharing, Data Loss Prevention|JIRANSOFT provides an SaaS platform for secure storage and control of enterprise assets in the cloud. 
Endpoint Security|Joe Security scans endpoints to provide malware protection. 
Identity and Access Management|Jumio provides solutions for digital ID verification. 
Firewall Platform, Cloud Security, Network Monitoring, Security|Juniper Networks challenges the status quo with products, solutions and services that transform the economics of networking. The company co-innovates with customers and partners to deliver automated, scalable and secure networks with agility, performance and value. 
Security Consulting|justASC provides advanced security consulting focused on threat management, secure architecture and incident response. 
Penetration Testing, Mobile Security|Kaprica Security offers penetration testing services with emphasis on mobile security, as well as mobile charging devices that scan for viruses. 
ICS/IoT Security|Karamba Security develops security systems for connected cars. The company focuses on securing the internals of car control systems. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Web Fraud Prevention, Endpoint Security,|Kaspersky Lab provides IT security products for endpoint users with emphasis on malware detection. 
Mobile Security|Kaymera Technologies provides a rnage of services and products for mobile security such as secured devices and applications. 
GRC, Security Training, Consulting|KDM Analytics helps risk managers quantify, measure, and prioritize cyber risks. 
Password/Privilege Management|Keeper Security provides secure password management and online vault storage solutions. 
Vulnerability Management, Security Analytics|Kenna provides a threat management platform focused on external breaches, data exploitation, and zero-day vulnerabilities. 
Unified Threat Management, Secure File Sharing|Kerio provides unified threat management (UTM) and collaboration solutions for its customers. 
Managed Security Services, Penetration Testing|Kernel provides a range of security services including managed and network security as well as penetration testing and security audit. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Keypasco offers secure multi-factor authentication and transaction verification for mobile devices. 
Information Assurance, Security Information Event Management|KEYW offers cyber security and information assurance analytics and SOC solutions through its Hexis Cyber Solutions platform. 
Security Consulting|Kindus is an IT security and services consulting firm located in the UK. 
Security Consulting|KLC Consulting offers a range of consulting services including assessments and risk management. 
Security Training|KnowBe4 provides security awareness training services for the enterprise. 
Voice Security|KoolSpan provides mobile communications security products with voice and messaging encryption. 
Security Consulting|KoreLogic provides a range of security professional services for business customers. Services include penetration testing, application security assessment, and threat modeling. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Kount’s fraud management, identity verification and online authentication technology empowers digital businesses, online merchants and payment service providers around the world. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|KPMG provides professional services to business clients, including information security. 
Incident Response, Security Consulting, Penetration Testing,|Kroll provides investigations, risk, and cyber security consulting services for business clients. 
Penetration Testing|Krypsys provides security professional services including penetration testing and compliance support. 
Incident Response, Security Consulting, Digital Forensics|K2 Intelligence provides investigative, integrity, and analytic consulting including forensics. 
Security Recruiting, Security Consulting|Kudelski Security is an international cybersecurity company providing innovative, independent and tailored security solutions for large enterprise and public sector clients. 
Penetration Testing, Security R&D|Kyrus focuses on security research, reverse engineering, computer forensics, and secure software development. 
Cloud Security, IDS|Lacework provides cloud threat detection through their product, Lacework Polygraph. 
Penetration Testing, Application Security|Lancera Security provides a range of services including penetration testing and secure application development. 
Incident Response|Landrian Networks uses virtual reality to visualize incident response and security operation centers. 
Security Consulting, Digital Forensics, Incident Response|Larson Security provides cyber security services including digital forensics and incident response. 
Security Analytics|Lastline® provides advanced malware detection and network breach protection for enterprise customers worldwide as a hosted or on-premise solution. 
Two-Factor Authentication|LaunchKey provides a next generation authentication and authorization platform using mobile devices. 
Penetration Testing, Application Security|Layer Seven Security provides a range of SAP security services including application security and penetration testing. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|LBMC Information Security offers a range of security consulting services including penetration testing. 
Infrastrucutre Security|Ledger develops security and infrastructure solutions for cryptocurrencies as well as blockchain applications for individuals and companies, by leveraging a distinctive, proprietary technology. Headquaters 1 rue du Mail, Paris Ile-de-France 75002 France Executives ERIC LARCHEVÊQUE serves as the CEO of Ledger. he discovered Bitcoin and the blockchain technology that struck him as the fourth industrial revolution. He then opened La Maison du Bitcoin, the French Bitcoin Center, before co-founding Ledger History Eric Larchevêque, Joel Pobeda, Nicolas Bacca and Thomas France founded Ledger in 2014. Ledger was launched in 2014 by eight experts with complementary backgrounds in embedded security, cryptocurrencies and entrepreneurship, united around the idea of creating secure solutions for blockchain applications. Key Competitors Trezor, Digital bitbox, KeepKey Products and Services Ledger develops a variety of products and services to safeguard cryptocurrency assets for individuals and companies – including the Ledger hardware wallets lin, The Ledger Nano S and Ledger Blue, two formats of multicurrency wallets, both software compatible and open-source. The other two major products are Ledger Vault and Ledger Live which are cryptocurrency wallet management solutions. Website https://www.ledger.com/ Lenzner Group (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/21/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Security Recruiting Brief Overview Lenzner Group provides search and recruiting services with emphasis in information security. 
Security Recruiting|Lenzner Group provides search and recruiting services with emphasis in information security. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting|Leidos offers solutions in national security, health, and engineering including cyber security. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Consulting|Leviathan Security Group is an information security and risk management consulting firm. 
Digital Forensics, Incident Response|LIFARS provides cyber security, digital forensics, and incident response support and services 
Security Analytics|LightCyber provides a breach detection platform with emphasis on the identification of Advanced Persistent Threats. 
Endpoint Security|Light Point Security offers a virtual machine-based isolated browsing solution to contain malware and prevent tracking. 
Mobile Security|Link Motion’s offerings includes enabling technology solutions and secure connected carputers for the ecosystem of car businesses, consumer ride sharing services, as well as legacy mobile security, productivity, and other related applications. NQ Mobile used to provide mobile Internet services for global customers including mobile security, vault, and family protection. 
DDOS Security|Link11 is a German company that provides DDOS protection solutions along with CDN and Hosting. 
Data Encryption, Secure File Sharing|Linoma Software focuses on providing enterprise customers with data security solutions including encryption, backup, and secure file transfer. 
Security Recruiting|LJ Kushner provides search and recruiting services for information security professionals. 
Information Assurance|Lockheed Martin Corporation provides R&D, development, manufacturing and integration of advanced technologies, including cyber security. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|LockPath provides platform support for governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) with support for response, workflow, and reporting. 
Security Information Event Management|LOGbinder provides tools for connecting security intelligence to the enterprise SIEM wit focus on Microsoft products. 
Security Information Event Management|Loggly provides a cloud-based service for collecting, managing, and mining enterprise log data as a complement to the SIEM. 
Penetration Testing|Logically Secure provides security consulting services with emphasis on penetration testing. 
Security Information Event Management|LogRhythm offers security intelligence and analytics solutions that unify SIEM, log management, network and endpoint monitoring, and advanced security analytics. 
Threat Intelligence|LookingGlass Security provides a cyber knowledge-based threat intelligence platform called ScoutVision. 
Mobile Security|Lookout is a cybersecurity company that supports individuals and enterprises being both mobile and secure. With visibility into over 30 million apps providing a dataset of virtually the world’s mobile code, the Lookout Security Cloud can identify connections that would otherwise go unseen, predicting and stopping mobile attacks before they do harm. 
Data Recovery, Data Destruction|LSoft provides a suite of tools for data recovery, security, and backup. 
Endpoint Security, Vulnerability Management|Lumension provides endpoint management with emphasis on patching, vulnerability management, and application whitelisting. 
Network, Endpoint and Cloud Visibility, Security Monitoring|Lumeta’s platform enables real-time cyber situational awareness of all enterprise IP assets across the entire network infrastructure to support risk-based cyber security analysis and breach detection. 
Cloud Security|Luminate Security develops a cloud-based security platform to provide secure access to hybrid cloud. 
Vulnerability Management, Penetration Testing, Security|Lunarline offers a range of cyber security and vulnerability management products and services including SOC operation, penetration testing, and privacy services. 
Embedded Security|Lynx Software technologies provides a family of real-time, embedded operating system products including rootkit detection and secure virtualization. 
Cybersecurity Accelerator|MACH37 provides a 90-day accelerator program to launch new cyber security start-ups. 
Network Access Control|Solutions offered by macmon include network access control (NAC) for enterprise with support for full network visibility. 
Incident Response|Maddrix provides incident response professional services including remediation and threat intelligence. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Training|MAD Security provides value added resale (VAR) of security and Managed Security Services that combines technology, services, support, and training 
Information Assurance|Magal S3 provides security, safety, and perimeter protection solutions, including cyber security/information assurance. 
Digital Forensics|Magnet Forensics provides data forensic software for recovery and analysis of Internet evidence from computers, smartphones, and tablets. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Endpoint Security|Malwarebytes protects individuals and businesses against dangerous threats such as malware, ransomware, and exploits. 
Cloud Security|Managed Methods provides a range of cloud monitoring and cloud access security solutions. 
Password/Privilege Management, Firewall Platform, Network|As the IT management division of Zoho Corporation, ManageEngine prioritizes flexible solutions that work for all businesses, regardless of size or budget. ManageEngine provides a suite of IT, directory, desktop, and related management tools including IT and network security. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance|Mandalorian Security provides a range of information assurance and information security advisory services in EMEA and Asia Pacific. 
Data Encryption|Manifold Technology is a company focused on bringing next generation blockchain solutions to more enterprise providers and end users. Manifold Security, Inc. develops technology to perform secure computations and to manage encryption keys privately in cloud. 
Security Recruiting|Manta Security Management Recruiters provides search and recruiting services focused on security management positions. 
Information Assurance|ManTech offers a range of technical government and commercial solutions including cyber security/information assurance. 
Threat Intelligence|Mantix4's M4 Cyber Threat Hunting Platform was originally developed in 2011 by a team of defense intelligence, cyber security, and military experts. Mantix4 leverages advanced threat intelligence, big data analytics, and behavior anomalies, to give users context-based threat intelligence through a highly-visual platform. The system can even detect and neutralize sophisticated breaches, including advanced viruses that can 'play dead,' and lie dormant in a company's systems for months. 
Brand Protection|MarkMonitor provides brand protection, protecting corporate brands from Internet counterfeiting, fraud, piracy, and cybersquatting.Also provides domain management and anti- piracy solutions. 
Cyber Insurance, Security Consulting|Marsh provides a range of insurance brokerage and risk management services including several cyber security offerings. 
Managed Security Services|Masergy provides a range of enterprise networking solutions including advanced managed security for cloud. 
Penetration Testing, Security Training|Maven Security provides a suite of security consulting and training services including Web and network security assessments. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Web Security, Mobile Security, Network|McAfee, formerly Intel Security, provides consumers, enterprise, and business customers a wide range of cyber security products. 
Security Recruiting|McIntyre Associates provides search and recruiting services focused on cyber security executive positions. 
Security Consulting|McKinsey offers a range of technology and business advisory services including enterprise and IT security risk consulting. 
Security Training|MediaPro offers a range of awareness, security, and privacy courses. 
Brand Protection, Vulnerability Management|The Media Trust Company provides media security scanning for Websites, advertisements, and mobile. 
Enterprise Architecture , Governance, Risk, and Compliance|MEGA provides a platform and set of solutions for enterprise architecture, enterprise GRC, IT GRC and GDPR compliance. 
Managed Security Services|MegaPath provides voice, data, and broadband telecommunications including managed security services. 
Endpoint Security, Web Security|Menlo Security provides agentless endpoint Web protection through on-premise or cloud proxy in its isolation platform. Isolation Platform protects organizations from cyber attack by eliminating the threat of malware. 
Information Assurance|Merlin International provides cybersecurity technology solutions to the US Federal Government and commercial organization. 
Email Security|MessageWare provides Microsoft Exchange security with emphasis on Outlook Web applications. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Training|Metacompliance provides policy management, GRC, compliance, and security awareness products and services for customers in the UK. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|MetaFlows provides threat and intrusion detection in the enterprise via collected and behaviorally analyzed traffic. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Training|Meta Intelligence provides intelligence-based services, cyber risk management, security training, and penetration testing. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|MetricStream provides enterprise and cloud applications for Governance, Risk, Compliance (GRC) and Quality Management for simple GRC solution 
Secure File Transfer, Mainframe Security|Attachmate focuses on a variety of enterprise products and services, including its mainframe and secure file transfer tools. 
Email Security, Secure File Sharing, Content Protection, Anti-|Microsoft provides computer software, consumer electronics, and personal computer services including IT security offerings. 
Cloud Security, Mobile Security|MicroStrategy Incorporated is a company that provides business intelligence (BI), mobile software, and cloud-based services. The firm develops software to analyze internal and external data in order to make business decisions and to develop mobile apps. 
Email Security, Secure File Sharing|Mimecast provides security, archiving, risk and compliance support, and continuity for enterprise email. 
Application Security|Minded Security provides software security consulting as well as application security testing tools. 
VAR Security Solutions, Security Consulting|MindPoint Group provides a range of managed, compliance, and cloud security services. 
Data Leakage Prevention|Minereye is a start-up security company providing a self-learning data leakage prevention (DLP) solution for the enterprise. 
Endpoint Security, Anti-Malware Tools|Minerva Labs is an innovative endpoint security solution provider that protects enterprises from today’s stealthiest attacks – those designed to evade existing defenses. Without relying on signatures, models or behavioral patterns, Minerva’s solution deceives the malware and causes it to disarm itself, thwarting it before the need to engage costly security resources. 
Cryptography, Cloud Security Solutions, Two-Factor|MIRACL provides a two-factor encryption and authentication solution, as well as a cryptographic SDK. 
Security Training|MIS Institute offers a range of training options in the area of internal audit, IT audit, and information security. 
VAR Security Solutions|Mission Critical Systems is an IT security reseller and integrator providing solutions across the Southeast United States and Caribbean. 
Mobile Security|Mitek Systems, Inc. develops, markets, and sells mobile image capture and identity verification software solutions for enterprise customers worldwide. 
Intrusion Detect/Prevent, Web Fraud Prevention, Cloud Security,|Mitnick Security provides penetration testing and ethical hacking services, as well as speaking engagements. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Mi-token provides a suite of two-factor authentication solutions including hard and soft tokens. 
Information Assurance, Security R&D|MITRE is a non-profit, federally funded R&D organization that includes cyber security initiatives. It manages federally funded research and development centers (FFRDCs) supporting several U.S. government agencies. 
Security Consulting|MKA provides a range of security consulting services including SOC and vSOC capabilities for public and private sector customers. 
Mobile Security|MobileIron provides enterprise mobility management products and services including mobile security. 
Security Analytics|Mobile System 7 provides enterprise security via data protection, identity analytics, and adaptive access controls. 
CA/PKI Solutions, Cloud Security, HW/Embedded Security,|Mocana provides a comprehensive cybersecurity system of endpoint security and security lifecycle management for industrial and IoT embedded devices. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Modulo provides governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) tools and solutions for enterprise customers. 
Wireless Security|Mojo Networks, previously AirTight Networks, provides a range of wireless LAN security solutions, including intrusion prevention, for enterprise customers. 
Security Recruiting|Momentum Security Recruitment provides search and recruiting services across UK, Europe, Middle East, and Africa. 
DLP|Monitorapp is a Korena based company that provides solutions for business critical data protection. 
Security Analytics, Email Security|Morphick provides security analytic tools for advanced threat detection and response. 
Security Analytics, Threat Intelligence, Endpoint Security,|Morphisec provides security services and solutions for endpoint security with threat intelligence and prevention 
CA/PKI solutions, Network Monitoring, Cloud Security,|Mosaic 451 provides advanced cyber security services and solutions to protect enterprise from information security threats Headquaters 3838 North Central Ave Suite 2050 Phoenix, AZ 85012 Tel: (888) 364-0803 Executives Mike Baker is the Principal and Managing Director at Mosaic 451. He was the founder and CTO of TorreyPoint. History Catherine Baker and Mike Baker founded Mosaic 451 in 2012 to provide NOC/SOC services to public and private companies. In 2014 it opened its first remote SOC and NOC outside of the Las Vegas area. In 2015 the company completed construction of a new SOC facility in Downtown Phoenix, Arizona. It is now also a registered ‘8a’ business and a registered Minority Business Enterprise. Key Competitors Mandiant, SecureWorks, Accuvant Products and Services Mosaic451 provides bespoke cyber operations, analysis, and critical infrastructure defense for high-risk, high-threat, complex and regulated (SOX, PCI, HIPAA, CIP, etc.) organizations in energy, finance, global distribution, government, healthcare, technology, and transportation. Mosaic 451 also provides Security Operations Center (SOC) and Network Operations Center (NOC) services. The different services provided by Mosaic 451 are as follows: • Managed Security Services • Security Operations • Network Operations • DevOps For Operations • Professional Services • K-12 Security • E-Rate Mosaic451 provides bespoke cyber operations, analysis, and critical infrastructure defense for high-risk, high-threat, complex and regulated (SOX, PCI, HIPAA, CIP, etc.) organizations in energy, finance, global distribution, government, healthcare, technology, and transportation. Website https://www.mosaic451.com MSi (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/23/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Intrusion Detection/Prevention Brief Overview MSi is protects critical physical assets, and the control systems that monitor and operate them. MSi provides cyber defense solutions for physical assets and controls 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|MSi is protects critical physical assets, and the control systems that monitor and operate them. MSi provides cyber defense solutions for physical assets and controls 
Two-Factor Authentication, Mobile Security|mSIGNIA provides technology to support strong authentication and fraud prevention on mobile apps. 
VAR Security Solutions|M.TECH is a regional IT security VAR focused on end-to-end security solutions offered through security technology partners. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|NagraID is a high-end smart card manufacturer supporting a variety of different identification applications. 
Brand Protection|Namogoo is pioneering the market of Customer Hijacking Prevention. Created with the mission of preserving a distraction- free online customer journey, Namogoo’s disruptive technology identifies and blocks unauthorized ads injected into consumer web sessions that divert customers to competitor offerings, hurting conversion rates and damaging brand equity. 
Network Monitoring|Napatech provides solutions for capturing, processing, and monitoring network traffic for real-time visibility. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|NAVEX Global supports ethics and compliance and offers a governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) platform. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|Navixia provides a range of security technical and advisory services including audit and training. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Infrastructure Security,|NCC Group offers a range of security testing and information assurance services including escrow, consulting, and domain services. 
Threat Intelligence|NC4 provides solutions for sharing and disseminating information related to cyber threats, physical safety, crime, and incident management. 
Cloud Security, Secure File Sharing|nCrypted Cloud offers encryption-based data security solutions for sharing files in the cloud. 
Endpoint Security, Risk Assesment|Nehemiah provides solutions to help protect your endpoints and provide visibility across your entire environment. 
Firewall Platform|NetAgent provides a range of network security products and services including the OnePointWall firewall for enterprise customers. 
VAR Security Solutions|Netbox Blue, now part of Bloomberg, provides a range of security solutions including next generation firewall and secure Web gateway through technology partnerships. 
Network Monitoring, Digital Forencis, Threat Intelligence|NetFort provides software products to monitor activity on virtual and physical networks. 
Vulnerability Management|NETpeas provides a SaaS marketplace with a payment interface front-end to a variety of security solutions including vulnerability management. 
Unified Threat Management|NetPilot Internet Security provides a unified threat management (UTM) solution as well as an endpoint PC protection product. 
VAR Security Solutions|Netpolean is a network and security solutions value added reseller (VAR) focused on the Southeast Asia region. 
Penetration Testing|Netragard provides a range of penetration testing and vulnerability assessment services. Netragard also develops and sells Breach Detection Solutions. 
DDoS Security, Network Visibility|Arbor Networks provides an enterprise and service provider products and services for network-based mitigation of real-time distributed denial of service (DDoS) threats. 
Network Security, App Security, ICS/IoT Security, Anti-Malware|NETSHIELD Corporation designs and delivers security solutions to enhance organizations cyber-risk mitigation strategies. It offers network access control devices for small and midsized organizations or network; and AppShield, a solution that secures various mobile applications on various platforms. The company’s solutions allow the client to control network access and detect, alert, and block accidental, unintended, malicious access, and data exfiltration. 
Cloud Security|Netskope cloud security software provides analytics, policy enforcement, and incident management to enable cloud services while preventing data loss and stopping threats. 
Vulnerability Management, Web Security|Netsparker provides a Web application and vulnerability scanning solution. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|NetSPI provides security professional services and penetration testing for its customers. 
Managed Security Services|Netsurion provides managed security services, mobile access, and compliance solutions for enterprise customers. 
Penetration Testing, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|Nettitude provides security-consulting services focused on penetration testing and PCI compliance. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Network Kinetix provides business assurance and anti-fraud revenue assurance to mobile carriers. 
VAR Security Solutions|Network Security Group provides network security solutions through a series of security technology partnerships. 
Information Assurance|Network Security Systems Plus provides information assurance solutions focused on Federal Government. 
Cloud Security, Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Netwrix provides solutions for auditing hybrid cloud environments for evidence of data threats. 
Infrastructure Security, DDOS Security|Neustar is a provider of telephony services such as number portability, as well as DNS and DDOS security protection. 
Cloud Security, Application Security|NeuVector provides continuous run time security for containers such as Docker and AWS instances. 
Information Assurance|Newberry Group provides a range of cyber security services for Federal Government customers. 
ICS/IoT Security|NexDefense provides security solutions for industrial control and automation systems. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Content Protection, Identity|NextLabs provides data protection, entitlement, and XACML access management policy support for information risk management. 
Secure File Sharing|NEXOR provides security solutions for information exchange and information assurance. 
VAR Security Solutions|Nexum is a security solutions provider offering services through a range of technology partners supported from Nexum SOC centers. 
Identity and Access Management|neXus provides a suite of identity and access management solutions including common access card, PKI, and BYOD support. 
DDOS Security|NexusGuard provides a range of DDOS protection services including fully managed solutions for the enterprise. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, PCI DSS/Compliance|nGuard provides a range of professional services including penetration testing and security assessment. 
VAR Security Services|NH&A provides security solutions for enterprise customer through partnerships with security technology providers. 
Network Monitoring|Niagara provides, visibility, monitoring, and security solutions for enterprise networks and service providers. 
Security Analytics, Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Niara provides a solution for behavioral analytics and machine learning-based attack detection for users and hosts. 
Security Analytics|NIKSUN develops real-time and forensics-based cyber security and network performance management solutions. 
Identity and Access Management|9Star offers software solutions for secure, federated single sign- on (SSO) access to enterprise and cloud applications. 
Active Defense, Security Consulting|Nisos is a technology enabled cyber security services company, created by former operations officers from the Intelligence Community specializing in Active Defense. Nisos specializes in Active Defense services and helps to secure and defend client networks and attribute threats against their organization. 
Information Assurance|NJVC provides a range of IT solutions for the Federal Government including cyber security/information assurance. 
Cloud Security, ICS/IoT Security, Wireless Security|Nokia is a communications and technology company that includes a range of cyber security products and services. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Nok Nok Labs offers a streamlined strong authentication protocol based on Fast Identity Online (FIDO). 
Infrastructure Security|Nominum provides communications service providers with DNS, marketing, and network security solutions. 
Identity and Access Management|NoPassword provides a variety of solutions to authenticate users. 
Vulnerability Management|Nopsec provides an on-premise or cloud-based unified vulnerability risk management solution collects and manages scanning output. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Analytics|Noragh Analytics offers a data analysis and decision framework for a variety of applications including cyber security. 
Threat Intelligence|Norse provides a live, cyber risk intelligence solution, as well as cloud-based network monitoring, and fraud reduction. 
Security Consulting|Northcross Group provides management and technology consulting including cyber security. 
Information Assurance|Northrop Grumman provides global aerospace and defense services including cyber security. 
Endpoint Security|Novell provides software and technology services including a range of cyber security products including endpoint security. 
Security Analytics, Network Monitoring|Novetta provides identity, cyber, big data and social analytics for commercial and government customers. 
Mobile Security, Digital Forensics|NowSecure provides mobile security solutions for enterprise including mobile forensics. 
ICS/IoT Security|Nozomi Networks is dedicated to protecting the availability of ICS/SCADA networks from cyber security incidents and process anomalies with its advanced real-time visibility solution. The company delivers innovative cyber security and operational visibility solutions for industrial control systems. Its next generation solution automatically builds an internal model of the industrial network and physical process and uses behavioral and continuous monitoring to detect changes to baseline states. The devices and process status, rapidly identifying and process anomalies. 
Endpoint Security|NPCore provides a range of network and endpoint security solutions. 
Security Consulting|NRI SecureTechnologies provides information security technology and management consulting services. 
Security R&D|NSS Labs, Inc. is a trusted source for independent, fact-based cybersecurity guidance. The company’s mission is to advance transparency and accountability within the cybersecurity industry. CISOs, Chief Security Architects, SOC and Threat Analysts, and information security professionals from many of the world's largest and most demanding enterprises rely on trusted information from NSS Labs. 
Web Security, Application Security, Vulnerability Management|N-Stalker provides a Web application security scanner for enterprise customers through the entire Secure Web development lifecycle. 
DDOS Security, Web Application Firewall|NSFOCUS provides DDOS mitigation solutions as well as a range of network security solutions including WAF and IPS. 
Endpoint Security|nTrepid provides a fully-managed virtual machine security solution for enterprise. 
Managed Security Services, Infrastructure Security, PCI|NTT Communications offers a range of global telecommunications services including managed security. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|NTT Security provides PCI QSA services, secure software consulting, and compliance support. 
Web Fraud Prevention|NuData Security provides a range of behavioral analytic solutions designed to detect on-line fraud. 
Security Consulting|NuHarbor Group provides a range of security, compliance, GRC, and risk management consulting services. 
Digital Forensics, Security Analytics|Nuix provides investigation, information governance, eDiscovery, and cyber security solutions for enterprise. 
VAR Security Solutions|Nuspire provides a range of managed security and network solutions through a variety of technology partners. 
Mobile Security, 2FA, ICS/IoT|NXT-ID provides various biometric solutions for the mobile platforms, access control, and law enforcement facial recognition markets. 
Endpoint Security|Nyotron provides endpoint security solutions that they describe as “your last line of defense.” The solutions are described as threat- agnostic meaning they can not only defend against known threats, but unkown threats as well. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Oberthur Technologies is a secure technology company providing digital security solutions for smart transactions, mobile financial services, and related applications. 
Security Analytics|ObserveIT provides a software solution for user activity monitoring based on tailored analytics and forensics. 
Security Consulting|Obsidian Analysis provides management consulting and professional services in the area of homeland security and intelligence, including cyber security. 
Security Training, Penetration Testing, Bug Bounty Support|Offensive Security provides security training and certification, as well as penetration testing and bug bounty services. 
Identity and Access Management|Okta provides a range of cloud-based enterprise identity management solutions including single sign-on and automated user management. 
Identity and Access Management|Omada provides adaptable identity management and idenetity and access governance solutions for enterprise. 
Unified Threat Management, Managed Security Services|OmniNet (MyDigitalShield) provides enterprise network security- as-a-service solutions focused on the small and medium-sized business market. 
Vulnerability Management, SAP Security, Application Security|Onapsis provides a behavioral-based approach to detecting anomalies against business critical applications with emphasis on SAP. 
Penetration Testing, Digital Forensics|Oneconsult AG is an owner-managed and vendor-independent Swiss cyber security services company. Oneconsult AG provides penetration testing, ISO 27001 security audit, and digital forensics solutions. 
Identity and Access Management, Password/Privilege|OneID focuses on the management of on-line identities without the need for passwords. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|OneLogin provides identity policy management across users, devices, and applications across cloud or premise. 
VAR Security Solutions|OneSecure Technology provides a range of IT and enterprise security solutions including email, network, data, and Web security. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Privacy Management|OneTrust is the global player in the field of privacy management software. More than 1,500 customers, including 200 of the Global 2,000, use OneTrust to comply with data privacy regulations across sectors and jurisdictions, including the EU GDPR and ePrivacy (Cookie Law). 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Onspring provides a platform for automating risk management, compliance, and audit. 
Cloud Security|OPAQ Networks’ management platform integrates networking and security, tightens security control, and establishes an agile infrastructure that allows organizations to stay ahead of emerging threats and instantly adapt to business and regulatory requirements. 
Infrastructure Security|OpenDNS, part of Cisco, provides cloud-delivered network security through enhanced DNS protection services. 
VPN/Secure Access|OpenVPN Technologies provides an open VPN solution that can be deployed as a software package, virtual appliance, or cloud- integrated service. 
Vulnerability Management|OPSWAT provides IT security products that protect devices, as well as secure and track data flows via malware scanning. 
Identity and Access Management|Optimal IdM is a provider of virtual cloud identity management solutions. 
Security Consulting|Optimal Risk Management provides a range of risk and security consulting services for business and government clients. 
Managed Security, Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, App|Optiv is a market-leading Security Solutions Integrator, planning/building/running end-to-end Cyber Security Solutions 
Identity and Access Management, Password/Privilege|Oracle provides a range of IT security services including identity and access management and data security. 
Managed Security Services, Security Consulting, PCI|Orange Business Services is a global integrator of communications solutions including cyber security services. 
Identity and Access Management, Password/Privilege|Osirium provides privileged user account management and protection solutions for the enterprise. 
Endpoint Security|Outlier Security provides agentless cyber security analytics as a service for endpoints. 
Vulnerability Management|Outpost24 provides automated vulnerability management and scanning solutions for the enterprise. 
Data diode cybersecurity devices and solutions|Owl Cyber Defense Solutions, LLC leads the world in hardware- based data diode and cross domain network cybersecurity. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Consulting|OWL Cybersecurity provides enterprise threat intelligence and related security services with emphasis on brand protection. 
Security Consulting, Digital Forensics|The Oxman Group provides cyber security management consulting and data forensics. 
Network Monitoring|PacketSled provides continuous network monitoring, threat detection, and Big Data analytic forensics. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|PA Consulting offers professional services including a digital trust and cyber security practice. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|Paladion offers managed security services and a range of risk management-based consulting services. 
Vulnerability Management|Palamida provides a scanning solution for open source software. 
Security Analytics|Palantir provides real-time data fusion and intelligence platform solutions for enterprise and other applications. 
Cloud Security, Incident Response|Palerra provides a SaaS platform for threat detection, predictive analytics, incident response, and configuration settings in public cloud offerings. 
Firewall Platform, Anti-Malware Tools, Cloud Security, Endpoint|Palo Alto Networks provides on-premise and virtualized next- generation firewall products and services for enterprise customer networks, endpoints and cloud. 
Network Monitoring|Panaseer provides security intelligence solutions to enterprises. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Web Security, Endpoint Security|Panda Security provides a suite of Internet security and Anti- Virus solutions for PCs and mobiles. 
Gaming Security|Panopticon Labs builds software that detects and prevents virtual identity theft, fraud, and abuse in on-line video games. 
Digital Forensics|Paraben provides a range of digital forensics and eDiscovery solutions for enterprise customers. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Digital Forensics,|Parameter Security is a technical security audit and ethical hacking firm specializing in financial services. 
Security Consulting|PatchAdvisor provides security-consulting services, including penetration testing, to enterprise customers. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting|Patriot provides a range of cyber security and information assurance solutions including infrastructure protection and mobile security solutions. 
Network Monitoring|PatternEx delivers artificial intelligence, combining analyst intuition with machine learning to defend the enterprise against cyber security threats. 
Mobile Security, Authentication, Password and Privilege|Payfone is a mobile and digital identity authentication solutions provider. Headquaters 245 5th Avenue, 11th Floor New York, NY 10016 USA Tel: 2815860060 Tel: (281) 586-0060 Executives Rodger Desai is Chief Executive Officer of Payfone, Inc. Rodger served as an executive at Accenture’s telecom practice before going on to become co-founder and CEO of Rave Wireless History Payfone was founded by Mike Brody and Rodger Desai in 2008 Key Competitors Boku, Bango, Zong Products and Services Payfone provides authentication services regardless of whether it is mobile app, mobile web, PC web, voice, chat or SMS. The products offered by payfone are as follows • Instant Authentication for Mobile • Instant Authentication for Voice • Instant Link for Web • Payfone Fonebook • Trust Score • Identity Pre-Fill Website https://www.payfone.com/ Pcysys (Alpha Version 0.2 – 06/28/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Penetration Testing, Network Monitoring Brief Overview Pcysys delivers an automated Penetration-Testing platform that assesses and reduces corporate cyber security risks. Headquaters 20 Magshimim st. Petah Tikva 4934829 Israel Executives Amitai Ratzon serves as the CEO of Pcysys. He has over 15 years of Enterprise Sales Leadership. Prior to Pcysys, Amitai was the VP of Global Sales at CallVU. History Arik Faingold and Arik Liberzon founded Pcysys in 2015. Pcysys also has Offices in United Kingdom and Canada. Key Competitors Outpost24, Securelink, MWR InfoSecurity Products and Services Pcysys provides penetration testing solutions. The Pcysys automated penetration-testing platform mimics the hacker’s attack. It automates the discovery of vulnerabilities and performs ethical exploits, while ensuring an undisrupted network operation. Website http://www.pcysys.com Peach Fuzzer (Alpha Version 0.2 – 06/28/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Vulnerability Management, Penetration Testing Brief Overview Peach Fuzzer offers a security fuzz testing platform to support penetration testing and related assurance and compliance measures. 
Penetration Testing, Network Monitoring|Pcysys delivers an automated Penetration-Testing platform that assesses and reduces corporate cyber security risks. Headquaters 20 Magshimim st. Petah Tikva 4934829 Israel Executives Amitai Ratzon serves as the CEO of Pcysys. He has over 15 years of Enterprise Sales Leadership. Prior to Pcysys, Amitai was the VP of Global Sales at CallVU. History Arik Faingold and Arik Liberzon founded Pcysys in 2015. Pcysys also has Offices in United Kingdom and Canada. Key Competitors Outpost24, Securelink, MWR InfoSecurity Products and Services Pcysys provides penetration testing solutions. The Pcysys automated penetration-testing platform mimics the hacker’s attack. It automates the discovery of vulnerabilities and performs ethical exploits, while ensuring an undisrupted network operation. Website http://www.pcysys.com Peach Fuzzer (Alpha Version 0.2 – 06/28/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Vulnerability Management, Penetration Testing Brief Overview Peach Fuzzer offers a security fuzz testing platform to support penetration testing and related assurance and compliance measures. 
Vulnerability Management, Penetration Testing|Peach Fuzzer offers a security fuzz testing platform to support penetration testing and related assurance and compliance measures. 
Email Security|Penango provides a suite of Web browser extensions that support authenticated and encrypted Webmail. 
Data Encryption, Web Security, Application Security, Web|Penta Security is an IT security firm offering Web application security, database security, encryption, and single sign-on solutions. 
Penetration Testing|Pen Test Partners provides a range of penetration testing services for mobile, SCADA, applications, and other areas. 
Security Consulting|Pentura, now part of InteliSecure, provides a range of security consulting services included penetration testing, managed services, and GRC services. 
Endpoint Security, Mainframe Security|Peraton Corp. offers technology-focused services and solutions. 
Secure File Sharing, Anti-Malware Tools, Email Security,|Perception Point is an Israeli cybersecurity company focused on leading advanced threat prevention across enterprise collaboration channels. Perception Point provides cloud-based hardware assisted platform designed to prevent cyber threats across all enterprise collaboration channels. The platform directly accesses a computer system's CPU to detect and prevent attacks to exploitation at the earliest possible stage, protecting businesses from phishing. 
Cloud Security, Identity and Access Management|PerfectCloud provides a security platform for cloud-based encryption, identity, and access management. 
VAR Security Solutions|Performanta provides a range of security VAR, technical, and consulting services to business customers. 
Web Security, App Security|PerimeterX is a cyber security company that prevents automated web and mobile application attacks by detecting & protecting against malicious web behavior. To separate the actions of bots from those of normal users, PerimeterX uses artificial intelligence & machine learning to identify behaviors that are unlikely to represent human actions. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Pervade Software provides security compliance monitoring and reporting solutions for the enterprise. 
Endpoint Security, Hardware/Embedded Security, ICS/IoT|PFP Cybersecurity provides embedded integrity verification technology for industrial control, mobile devices, and other equipment. 
Security Automation|Phantom Cyber focuses on using automation to improve the effectiveness of enterprise security operations. 
Security Consulting|Phirelight offers a suite of IT security consulting and cyber security protection solutions. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|Phish Labs provides a range of security services focused on detecting and preventing phishing-related threats. 
Security Training|PhishLine provides a social engineering management platform to reduce phishing risk. 
ICS/IoT Security|Phoenix Contact provides security products for production facilities, machines, and other industrial applications. 
Security Consulting|Phoenix Data Security provides security-consulting services with focus on data loss prevention. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Picus Security provides solutions for continuous assessment and monitoring of IT security and compliance controls. 
Threat Intelligence|Pierce Global Threat Intelligence (GTI) provides ranked threat intelligence to help prioritize IT security tasks. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Pindrop Security provides solutions for detecting and preventing phone scams and fraud in call centers. 
Identity and Access Management|Ping Identity provides single sign-on and identity management solutions with emphasis on mobile access to the cloud. 
Security Recruiting|Pinnacle Placement provides search and recruiting services for positions in the security industry. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance, Penetration Testing|PivotPoint Security provides a range of information assurance and security consulting services including penetration testing and ethical hacking. 
Cloud Security, Data Encryption|PKWare provides data security software that secures data files at rest and in transit with passphrase or certificate-based encryption and cross-platform capability. 
Network Monitoring|Plixer provides a network traffic analytics system that supports fast and efficient incident response. The solution allows you to gain visibility into cloud applications, security events, and network traffic. It delivers actionable data to guide you from the detection of network and security events all the way to root-cause analysis and mitigation. Network and security incidents are inevitable. When they occur, Plixer is there to help you quickly return to normal and minimize business disruption. Thousands of organizations rely on Plixer solutions to keep their IT infrastructure running efficiently. 
Two-Factor Authentication|PointSharp provides a two-factor authentication for mobile users, as well as mobile gateway services for Microsoft Lync and Exchange. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Portcullis provides a range of security consulting services including penetration testing and threat analysis-based response. 
Web Security, Application Security, Web Application Firewall|Port80 Software provides Web application security and performance solutions focused on Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS). 
Cloud Security, Data Encryption|Porticor, part of Intuit, provides data encryption, key management, and security compliance solutions for the cloud. 
Network Access Control|Portnox provides a software platform that provides network access control and related analysis for physical, virtual, or cloud devices and users. 
Application Security, Web Security|PortSwigger provides a suite of Web application security testing tools and solutions including Burp. 
Application Security, Mobile Security|Pradeo is a global company, leader in the mobile security field, offering innovative solutions to protect devices (smartphones, tablets or connected objects) and master applications. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Incident Response, PCI|Praetorian offers a range of security consulting services focused on applications, mobile, and network. 
Two-Factor Authentication, ICS/IoT Security|Precise Biometrics AB provides fingerprint software for identity authentication in Sweden, Denmark, Luxembourg, Great Britain, Switzerland, Finland, Norway, Belgium, Estonia, China, the United States, and internationally. 
Network Monitoring|Preempt Security has a solution to help enterprises identify and respond to breaches of the enterprise network in real time. 
Security Analytics|Prelert provides anomaly detection analytics in support of IT security and operations. Headquarter Prelert 20 Speen Street, #200 Framingham, Massachusetts 01701 Tel: (508) 319 – 5300 Executives Mark Jaffe, CEO of Prelert, was previously Worldwide VP of Firewall and Behavioral Analysis Sales at McAfee. History Stephen Dodson founded Prelert in 2009. The private company is headquartered in Massachusetts. Sierra Ventures, Fairhaven Capital Partners, and Intel Capital have provided $11.3M in venture capital funding through Series A and B rounds. Key Competitors Sumo Logic, Guardian Analytics Products and Services Prelert provides a range of security analytics and anomaly detection tools that can be grouped as follows: • Anomaly Detective – Provides automated anomaly detection analytics on streaming data to discover behavioral changes to gain cross-correlative insights • AD App for Splunk – Provided as a native app • AD Engine & API – Supports NoSQL, Hadoop, and other data stores The company uses statistical methods to detect anomalies in data, focusing on “fingerprints” of attack indicators in log files. Website https://www.prelert.com/ Prevalent (Alpha Version 0.2 – 07/01/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Consulting Brief Overview Prevalent provides a range of security consulting solutions with emphasis on compliance and third-party vendor risk management. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Consulting|Prevalent provides a range of security consulting solutions with emphasis on compliance and third-party vendor risk management. 
Application Security|Prevoty provides runtime application security visibility and protection using a signatureless technology rooted in Language- Theoretic Security (LANGSEC). 
CA/PKI Solutions|PrimeKey provides open source enterprise PKI and digital signature product and service solutions. 
Governance, Risk, Compliance|Privacera provides a platform for enterprises to manage risks with sensitive data. 
Web Application Firewall|Privacyware provides a range of intrusion detection security products including a Web application firewall for Microsoft Web servers. 
Cloud Security, Identity and Access Management|Privakey’s mission is to simplify how people confirm their identities, assert their intent and respond to any challenge. We improve the customer experience and security of interactions by eliminating the reliance on passwords, “security” questions and other forms of unreliable identity verification mechanisms that both frustrate users and put their information at risk. 
Cloud Security|PrivateCore, now part of Facebook, offers virtual solutions for ensuring trusted execution of software on cloud servers. 
CA/PKI Solutions, Cloud Security, Data Encryption|Private Machines protects cloud and data center workloads, and brings users technology that is secure and easy to use. 
Parental Controls|PRIVO provides youth certification and on-line service registration with parental consent and children’s online privacy and delegated consent management. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Cloud Security|Privitar is an enterprise software company headquartered in London. Privitar is a leading developer of privacy engineering technology enabling our customers to innovate and leverage data with an uncompromising approach to data privacy. 
Security Consulting, VAR Security Solutions|ProactiveRisk provides cyber security professional and managed services including security testing and response planning. 
VAR Security Solutions, Managed Security Services|Proficio provides a range of managed security, SOC-as-a-service, and managed scanning services for the enterprise. 
Security Consulting|ProfitStars provides a range of professional services and solutions for financial services companies including information security and risk management consulting. 
Endpoint Security, Visibility and Control|Promisec provides an agentless cloud-based or on-premise solution for securing the endpoints in an enterprise. 
Application Security|Promon offers integrated service protection products to online service providers for the protection of Web Services, such as online banking, online CRM/ERP systems, public services, and e- commerce sites. 
Email Security|Proofpoint is a next generation cyber security company addressing advanced threats and compliance risks by providing security-as-a-service to protect enterprise email, social media, and mobile apps from malware, data leakage, and other security threats. 
Incident Response|Prosoft Systems provides incident response management built on a CRM base. 
Mobile Security, Application Security|Protected Mobility offers solutions for mobile app security including a secure SMS service. 
Identity and Access Management|Protected Networks is a German company that provides server access rights management solutions. 
Cloud Security|ProtectWise offers cloud security through network capture, forensics, and related security functions. 
Cloud Security|Protegrity provides a range of Big Data and Cloud security solutions including encryption. 
Intrusion Detection and Prevention|Protenus, Inc. develops software for detecting and preventing data breaches by insiders to protect hospitals patient privacy. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|Protiviti provides a range of business consulting services included GRC, audit, and risk management. 
Penetration Testing|Provensec provides a range of security consulting and penetration testing services for mid-sized businesses. 
Mobile Security, Network Access Control, VPN/Secure Access|Pulse Secure provides Secure Access solutions for Hybrid IT that integrate SSL VPN, Mobile security, Cloud Access Security, Software-Defined Perimeter and Network Access Control. 
Security Consulting|PUNCH is a boutique cyber consulting firm offering security analytic support for threat management. 
Parental Controls|PureSight offers apps (Android/iOS) and PC-solutions called Surfie that provide a range of filtering and monitoring protections for children on-line. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|PwC is a multinational professional services company that includes a cyber security-consulting offering. 
Penetration Testing|Pwnie Express provides a range of penetration testing, security testing, asset discovery, and vulnerability management tools. 
Network Monitoring, Endpoint Security, Digital Forensics|Qadium is a SaaS company that provides visibility info and insights into an enterprise’s network boundaries. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Qbit provides IT security-related consultation services in the Netherlands. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Qihoo 360 provides Anti-Virus and malware protections for endpoint devices including mobile. 
Security Consulting, Training/Awareness, Infrastructure Security,|QinetiQ is a British multinational defense technology company headquartered in Farnborough, Hampshire. QinetiQ operates locations in the UK, North America, and Australia. 
Network Monitoring|Qosmos provides a platform for collecting network traffic for the purpose of telecommunications and security management. 
DDOS Security|Qrator Labs provides a network-based solution to DDOS attacks from botnets toward enterprise business. 
Managed Security Services, Threat Intelligenced|Q6 security offers managed security services, threat intelligence, and professional services for the enterprise. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services|Quadrant Information Security provides a range of security consulting, managed security, and enterprise security management. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Quad Metrics offers tools for estimating security posture of enterprise teams and their partners, as well as to provide support in reducing risk. 
Vulnerability Management, Continuous Monitoring, Policy|Qualys provides cloud-based security and compliance functions through its Qualys Cloud Platform. 
Managed Security Svcs, PCI-DSS/Compliance|Quann is a managed security service provider in Asia. 
Infrastructure Security, Web Application Firewall|Quantil provides content distribution networking (CDN) and related security solutions for Internet-based web and application hosting sites. 
Anti-Malware|Quick Heal Technologies is an IT security solutions provider offering anti-malware software for PCS. 
Data Encryption|Quintessence Labs provides quantum optics and cryptographic data security solutions. 
Application Security|Quotium provides security products that support the Agile software development lifecycle. 
CA/PKI Solutions|QuoVadis provides managed digital certificates including PKI- based identity services. 
Cloud Security|Rackspace modernizes IT in today’s multi-cloud world by delivering IT as a service across private and public sectors. 
Identity and Access Management|Radiant Logic provides federated identity services based on technology and directory virtualization. 
Application Security, Web Application Firewall, DDOS Security,|Radware offers a suite of security services focused on application delivery and load balancing, web application firewall, and protection from DDOS at layers 4 through 7. 
Security R&D|RAND Corporation is a non-profit group that helps improve policy and decision making through research and analysis. 
Security Consulting|The Risk Assistance Network (RANE) connects subject matter experts, including in cyber security, with subscribers requiring assistance. 
CA/PKI Solutions, IoT security|Raonsecure promotes technology and products for integrated authentication including human/device authentication, security- applied technology, and Fast Identity Online based on PKI technology. 
Vulnerability Management, Penetration Testing, Mobile Security,|Rapid7 provides a range of vulnerability management, penetration testing, mobile risk management, endpoint control monitoring, and user activity monitoring security solutions. 
Managed Security Services, Endpoint Security, Incident|RAS Infotech is Value Added Distributor who works exclusively with selected manufacturers in IT Security Space. RAS in over 15 years of its existence has more than 1000 satisfied clients. RAS uses simple systems and software products to help businesses solve their critical business problems. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance, Security Training|RavenEye provides a range of security consulting services including ethical hacking, PCI DSS QSA services, and penetration testing. 
Information Assurance, Web Security, Managed Security|Raytheon is a defense contractor in the area of weapons manufacturing and military electronics that includes a cyber security/information assurance offering. 
Mainframe Security|Raz-Lee Security is one of the world’s leading independent cybersecurity and compliance solutions providers for IBM i servers (AS/400). 
Security Consulting|Razorpoint Security Technologies provides a range of security consulting, professional, and managed services including penetration testing. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Reaction Information Security provides security-consulting services with emphasis on penetration testing. 
Threat Intelligence|Recorded Future delivers real-time threat intelligence powered by machine learning. 
Endpoint Security|Red Canary offers managed endpoint security protections to detect advanced threats. 
Security Analytics, Data Security|Red Lambda provides a Big Data platform called MetaGrid that combines computing and storage with the security functions of correlation, reporting, anomaly detection, and automation. 
GRC, Cloud Security|RedLock enables effective security governance across Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Google Cloud Platform. 
Security Analytics|RedOwl provides a platform for behavioral analytics of corporate data based on machine learning and statistics for compliance and threat management. 
Managed Security Services, Network Monitoring, Incident|Redscan is an award-winning provider of managed cyber security services that help organisations prevent, detect and respond to threats and breaches. 
Threat Intelligence|RedSeal Networks provides security intelligence of internal and external attack vectors against prioritized assets. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Redspin, now part of Auxilio, provides a range of security consulting services including penetration testing, application security, and audit services. 
Security Consulting, ICS/IoT Security, Security Training|Red Tiger Security offers security consulting and training services with emphasis on ICS/SCADA security. 
Information Assurance, VAR Security Solutions|Referentia provides a range of information assurance product, and managed solutions with emphasis on government customers. 
Security Consulting|ReliaQuest is pushing the boundaries of IT security—past allegiance to any one security tool, workforce limitations, or definitions of existing market categories. Their technology is delivered as a customized service, allowing enterprise security teams to stay agile without compromising quality. It maximizes investments organizations have already made, adding access to broader sources of data. They transform organizations into their own security platforms. 
Identity and Access Management|Remediant helps enterprises protect their privileged accounts from misuse and abuse. 
Information Assurance|RSI provides a range of solutions including cyber security/information assurance, cloud integration, network design, and other services. 
Brand Protection|Reputation.com provides brand and personal reputation protection management using a reputation score based on analytics. It provides Online Reputation Management Service. 
Security R&D|Reservoir Labs provides a range of scientific and technical research in areas such as network technology and security. 
GRC|Resolver, Inc. provides a suite of software and services for risk managers, internal auditors, compliance managers, and strategic planners. 
Hardware/Embedded Security, Incident Response, Threat|Respond Software is a provider of automated cyber security threat protection, working to help companies achieve high performance and efficiency in people-intensive security operations. Respond Software is a team of seasoned professionals who have decades of experience not only building enterprise-scale security software, but also standing-up Security Operations Centers with people, processes and technical infrastructures for enterprises and agencies across the globe. 
Email Security, Brand Protection, Infrastructure Security|ReturnPath provides a range of security intelligence, anti-fraud, and mitigation solutions for email. 
Security Analytics, Incident Response|Reversing Labs provides a static file analysis platform for deep file analysis and advanced malware detection with support for incident response. 
Identity and Access Management, Secure Print, Embedded OEM|RF IDeas, Inc., a subsidiary of Roper Technologies,designs, develops, and manufactures a complete line of pcProx® card readers that support nearly every proximity and contactless smart card in use worldwide. RF IDeas is a leader in the employee badge and card reader space for healthcare, manufacturing, government and enterprise. Partnering with leading technology companies, RF IDeas readers enable innovative solutions for identification and access management including computer logon, secure printing, attendance tracking, mobility, HMI and PLC access, dispensing, kiosks, point-of-sale, and other applications that require authentication. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Rhino Security Labs is a boutique penetration testing company with focus on network, cloud, and web/mobile application penetration testing services. 
Security Consulting, Cyber Insurance|Working with C-suite executives, corporate directors, and senior leaderships Ridge Global Cybersecurity Institute provides an array of cybersecurity services aimed at enhancing global resilience to cyber attacks that threaten our national and economic security. 
Content Protection|Rightsline provides a digital rights management (DRM) solution for tracking and managing contract and royalty rights with emphasis on media and entertainment. 
DDOS Security|RioRey provides a DDOS protection platform that analyses incoming attacks and automatically mitigates. 
Penetration Testing|Riscure is a global security test laboratory with solutions for side channel test and analysis. 
Security Consulting|Risk Based Security provides detailed information and analysis on Data Breaches and Software Vulnerability Intelligence. The firm’s products, Cyber Risk Analytics (CRA) and VulnDB, provide organizations access to the most comprehensive threat intelligence knowledge bases available, including advanced search capabilities, access to raw data via API, and email alerting to assist organizations in taking the right actions in a timely manner. 
Brand Protection, Vulnerability Management|RiskIQ provides solutions that scan the open Web to help an organization ensure security outside its firewall-protected enterprise, including its on-line advertisements. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|RiskLens provides a software platform for quantification and modeling of corporate risk. 
Vulnerability Manageme, Penetration Testing|RiskSense provides a vulnerability management platform along with a range of security services. 
CA/PKI Solutions|Rivetz technology and services aim to provide a safer and easier- to-use model for all users to protect their digital assets using hardware-based trusted execution technology. 
Cloud Security, Network Monitoring, Web Application Firewall,|Rohde & Schwarz Cybersecurity is a European IT security company that develops and produces technologically leading solutions for information and network security, including highly secure encryption solutions, cloud security, next generation firewalls and endpoint security. Headquaters Mühldorfstraße 15 81671 Munich Germany Tel: 49 89 41 29 – 0 Executives Since 2015, Reik Hesselbarth is the Managing Director and Cief Financial Officer. He was the Chief Operating Officer before 2015. Christian Stüble is Chief Technology Officer of Rohde & Schwarz Cybersecurity. Since 2005, Christian was Chief Technology Officer of Sirrix AG before. History The company was founded by Lothar Rohde and Hermann Schwarz who met while studying physics in Jena in 1933 and it specializes in the fields of electronic test equipment, broadcast & media, cybersecurity, radiomonitoring and radiolocation, and radiocommunication. There are regional headquarters in the US (Columbia, Maryland) and in Asia (Singapore). Almost 6,000 of the company's employees work in Germany, including the around 2,000 employees at the Munich headquarters. Key Acquisitions Gateprotect AG (2014) - Firewall Sirrix AG (2015) – Enterprise Security Denyall (2016) – Application Security R&S Cybersecurity HSM (2016) - Governmental Cyberdefense Key Competitors Atsec Information Security, RISC Group, Artic Wolf Networks Products and Services Rohde and Scwarz Cybersecurtiy develops and produces technologically leading solutions for information and network security, including highly secure encryption solutions, cloud security, next generation firewalls and endpoint security. The portfolio also includes vulnerability scanners and firewalls for business-critical web applications and web services. The company provides cybersecurity solutions in the following areas: Desktop Security, Mobile Security, Network Security, Application and Cloud Security and Consulting. Website https://www.rohde-schwarz.com/cybersecurity/ Rofori (Alpha Version 0.2 – 07/09/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Consulting Brief Overview Rofori provides a capability for managing cyber risk in the enterprise consistent with the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Security Consulting|Rofori provides a capability for managing cyber risk in the enterprise consistent with the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. 
Application Security|Rogue Wave offers a range of software development, test, and deployment solutions including code analysis and application security. 
Security Consulting, Incident Response|Roka Security provides a range of security consulting services including network reviews, vulnerability assessments, and support for incident response. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services, VAR Security|Rook Security provides advisory services, managed security services, and solution integration. 
Managed Security Services|Root Cellar Technologies is an IT solutions provider servicing Southwestern Ontario and the Greater Toronto Area. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Security Training|R9B is a leading provider of advanced cybersecurity products, services, and training. The company operates multiple security operations centers (aka Adversary Pursuit Centers) to deliver 24x7x365 managed security and managed detection and response services. R9B Managed Security Services include data ingestion and analysis by dedicated experts trained to spot threats and breaches. R9B Managed Detection and Response services are a turnkey approach to monitoring network activity and conducting lightweight response measures in the event of a network intrusion. In addition, the company offers Threat Hunting as both an individually deployable product and as a remotely delivered, managed service. The company’s flagship ORION platform enables threat hunters to proactively and stealthily identify malicious actors and eliminate them from proprietary networks. As an innovator, R9B has made significant investments in artificial intelligence (expert systems) technology to promote faster and more accurate threat identification. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Identity Assurance, Multi-Factor|RSA® Business-Driven Security™ solutions uniquely link business context with security incidents to help modern organizations manage digital risk and protect what matters most. With award-winning cybersecurity solutions from RSA, organizations can detect and respond to advanced attacks; manage user identities and access; and reduce business risk, fraud and cybercrime. RSA solutions protect millions of users around the world and help more than 90 percent of Fortune 500 companies take command of their security posture and thrive in an uncertain, high-risk world. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Rsam provides a platform for governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) enterprise support. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|RSM provides tax, accounting, and consulting services including GRC solutions for enterprise. 
Data Encryption, Cloud Security, ICS/IoT Security|Rubicon Labs provides a secure communications and key management solution for cloud and IoT. 
Security Recruiting|Russell Reynolds Associates provides a range of executive-level retained search services for global organizations. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|SaaSAssurance provides a compliance platform for achieving and managing cloud standards compliance including ISO 27001, PCI DSS, and HIPAA. 
Security Recruiting|Sabat Group provides search and recruiting services for information security professionals. 
Penetration Testing, Application Security|The SafeBreach platform executes breach methods on a target system to identify potential weaknesses. 
Security Consulting, CA/PKI Solutions|SafeCipher offers a range of security consulting services including PKI solutions, PCI services, and encryption. 
Infrastructure Security|SafeDNS develops web filtering solutions for different markets and customers. 
Cloud Security, GRC Platform|SafeGuard Cyber provides end-to-end digital risk protection Headquaters SafeGuard Cyber 410 A East Main St Charlottesville VA 22902 Tel: (434) 207-4265 Executives Jim Zuffoletti serves as the Chairman and CEO of Safeguard Cyber. Octavio Freire is the President and the CTO of Safeguard Cyber History Jim Zuffoletti and Octavio Freire founded SafeGuard Cyber in 2004. Before 2018, SafeGaurd Cyber was known as Social Safe Guard. Key Competitors McKinsey and Company, Delloite Products and Services SafeGuard Cyber delivers its industry-leading solution for digital and social media risk management. SafeGuard Cyber platform is a single solution to detect, prevent, and defend against threats in all your digital channels. SafeGuard Cloud Platform is flexible in architecture and adaptable to new threats and delivers Digital Risk Protection on Demand. Today, SafeGuard Cyber helps companies detect threats in real time, defend their organizations by providing the folllowing services: • Surveillance • Defense • Governance • SafeGuardMe Mobile App Website https://www.safeguardcyber.com/ SaferZone (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/11/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Data Leakage Prevention Brief Overview SaferZone provides PC security solutions for safeguarding the cloud. 
Data Leakage Prevention|SaferZone provides PC security solutions for safeguarding the cloud. 
Data Encryption, Compliance|SafeLogic provides cryptographic technology for mobile devices, servers, Cloud, and appliances, specializing in FIPS 140-2 validation. 
Mainframe Security|Safestone, now part of HelpSystems, provides a range of IBM server security products focused on user, password, and network support. 
Secure File Sharing|Safe-T provides solutions for managing secure data exchange between businesses, people, and applications. 
Security Consulting|Sage Data Security provides information security consulting, testing, and training including a log analysis service. 
Information Assurance|SAIC is a technology integrator that offers cyber security and information assurance solutions for Federal Government. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|SAI Global provides a range of professional services supporting audit, certification, and business process including compliance and risk. 
Identity and Access Management|SailPoint provides on-premise and cloud identity management software solutions for enterprise. 
Vulnerability Management, Penetration Testing|SAINT offers vulnerability management, penetration testing, and compliance solutions. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|In addition to sales force automation and CRM, Salesforce Identity also provides a range of identity and access management capabilities for its customers. 
Mobile Security, Data Encryption|SaltDNA Enterprise develops solutions that leverage multi- layered encryption techniques to secure enterprise mobile communications. 
Infrastructure Security|SaltStack was built as an orchestration and automation platform to manage data center infrastructure. 
Security Consulting|sandSecurity offers a range of security consulting services including assessments and risk mitigation. 
Firewall Platform, Web Security|Sangfor provides a range of network and security solutions including next generation firewall and SSL/VPN. 
Security Training|SANS provides a comprehensive range of computer security training, certification, and research services. 
ICS/IoT Security, Hardware/Embedded Security, Content|Sansa, now part of ARM, provides embedded security solutions for device content protection, platforms, and chip manufacturers supporting IoT. 
SAP Security, Cloud Security, Governance, Risk, and|SAP provides a range of security, data protection, and privacy solutions for its customers. 
Security Analytics, Governance, Risk, and Compliance|SAS provides a range of business intelligence and data analytics capabilities including security analytics. 
Managed Security Services|SAVANTURE provides managed security and consulting services including SIEM, log management, vulnerability management, and authentication. 
Identity and Access Management, Governance, Risk, and|Saviynt provides cloud access governance and intelligence for data protection, privacy, and regulatory requirements. 
Network Monitoring, Security Analytics|Savvius provides network monitoring and security analytics software. 
ICS/IoT Security, Infrastructure Security|SCADAfence Ltd. develops cyber security solutions to protect the industrial Internet of Things in manufacturing industries and critical infrastructure. 
ICS/IoT Security, Security Training|SCADAhacker provides a range of information, training, and resources for SCADA security. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|SDG provides a governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) platform for the enterprise called TruOps. 
Data Encryption, Application Security, Mainframe Security|SDS provides products that focus on security, encryption, data compression, performance monitoring, report distribution, and client-server applications for mainframes. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Seamoon is a one-time password (OTP) manufacturer supporting a variety of applications including remote access and banking. 
Content Protection, Cloud Security, Endpoint Security,|Secardeo is a provider of corporate solutions using digital signatures and certificates. 
Threat Prevention, Malware Detection|Today, SecBI is a disruptive player in automated cyber threat detection and network traffic analysis. SecBI’s technology is used by financial institutions, telecoms, retailers, manufacturing and other enterprises worldwide. 
Threat Intelligence, Security R&D|SecDev Group is a cyber research think tank that provides open intelligence to improve awareness in cyber security and related areas. 
Threat Detection, Incident Response|SECDO develops solutions that enable security operations teams to cut down incident response times. 
Penetration Testing|SECFORCE offers a range of penetration testing services and tools. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Seclore provides enterprise digital rights management solutions that enables organizations to control the usage of files. 
Vulnerability Management|SecludIT provides security vulnerability scanning and risk assessment of server infrastructure. 
Security Information Event Management, Security Analytics|Secnology provides range of tools for performing log management and analysis functions. 
Threat Detection|SecondWrite’s sandbox detects advanced malware including APT’s, targeted attacks, and zero-day evasions. 
Vulnerability Management, Unified Threat Management|SecPoint provides IT security products including a vulnerability scanner, UTM firewall, and Web scanner. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Secure File Sharing|SecSign Technologies provides two-factor authentication, encryption, and related file sharing capabilities. 
Data Leakage Prevention, Data Destruction|Secudrive provides data loss prevention as well as secure USBs, copy protected USBs, secure file servers, and other security solutions. 
Two Factor Authentication.|SecuGen Corporation is a provider of advanced, optical fingerprint recognition technology, products, tools, and platforms. 
Cloud Security, Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Seculert provides a virtual, cloud-based platform that is accessible to the enterprise via APIs. Their service for customers offers a range of security protections including detection and mitigation of advanced persistent threats (APTs). 
Data Encryption, CA/PKI Solutions, Cloud Security|Secunet Security Networks offers businesses and governments with IT security solutions. 
Vulnerability Management|Secunia, now part of Flexera Software, offers solutions for patch and vulnerability management for business and consumers. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Secure Access Technologies provides multi-factor authentication using mobile devices. 
Data Leakage Prevention, CA/PKI solutions, Email Security|SecureAge Technology provides data protection solutions that help prevent, protect, and shield governments and enterprises from data breaches. 
Security Consulting|Secure Anchor provides a range of security consulting services including vulnerability assessment, penetration testing, and forensics. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|SecureAuth provides an identity management solution that supports enterprise requirements for single sign-on and two-factor authentication for mobile, web, and cloud applications. 
Data Encryption|Secure Channels provides a range of data encryption solutions for various types of systems and applications. 
Security Analytics|Secure Decisions provides a range of cyber security visualization solutions for analysis support of software, networks, and other systems. 
Security Consulting|Secure Digital Solutions provides a range of IT security, and governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) consulting services. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Security Analytics, Identity and|Secured Touch provides multi-factor authentication and real-time behavioral monitoring of business profiles. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Secure-IC provides solutions for embedded security including secure cores and fault injection. 
Security Consulting|Secure Ideas provides a range of security consulting solutions including penetration testing. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|SecureKey offers identity and authentication solutions for online consumer service providers. 
VPN/Secure Access|SecureLink provides a solution for secure, remote support with audit and accountability. 
Voice Security|The SecureLogix Enterprise Telephony Management (ETM) System platform offers security protections for voice and unified communications including policy enforcement and telephony denial-of-service (TDOS) risk reduction. 
Brand Protection|SecureMySocial provides real-time business, physical, and regulatory risk warnings for users of social media. 
VAR Security Solutions|SecureNation provides IT security, compliance, and information assurance solutions through value added resale partnerships with technology vendors. 
Security Training|Secure Ninja provides specialized cyber security training and IT security and testing services. 
Two-Factor Authentication|SecurEnvoy provides strong, two-factor authentication with mobile, voice, and other factors. 
Two-Factor Authentication|SecurePush provides a layer of additional multi-factor authentication for managing identities across various devices and applications. 
Security Recruiting|Secure Recruiting International provides search and recruiting services for the cyber security industry. 
ICS/IoT Security|SecureRF provides security solutions for wireless sensors, smart grids, NFC, RFID, and other IoT devices and systems. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|SecureState is a global management-consulting firm focused on information security with support for a variety of industries including Federal Government. 
Security Consulting, Vulnerability Management, Network|SecureStrux is a women-owned small business cybersecurity firm that provides specialized services in the areas of compliance, vulnerability management, computer network defense, and cybersecurity strategies. 
Managed Security Services|SecureWorks provides a range of threat intelligence-driven managed security services. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting|SecureWorx provides a range of security/information assurance and consulting solutions with emphasis on the Australian Government. 
ICS/IoT Security, Security Consulting, VAR Security Solutions|Securicon provides a range of security solutions including assessments with emphasis on SCADA, process control, and other areas. 
Secure File Sharing|SecuritiNet provides a cloud-based highly secure file sharing and communication solution for the “trusted good guys”, who qualify based on a group vetting methodology. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Security Art provides a range of cyber security consulting services including red team exercises. 
Penetration Testing|Security Audit Systems provides a range of security consulting services including penetration testing. 
Security Training|The Security Awareness Company provides end-user security awareness training materials. 
Security Training|Security Awareness Incorporated provides security training with focus on awareness materials and services. 
Application Security Solutions|Security Compass is an application security solutions company that helps customers to proactively manage cybersecurity risk, without slowing down business. They offer DevSecOps for Application Security program solutions comprised of advisory services, training, and SD Elements, an award-winning policy-to- procedure platform for security and compliance. 
DDOS Security|SecurityDAM provides a DDOS detection and mitigation solution for communications service providers. 
Threat Intelligence|Security-Database monitors and provides dashboard summaries of vulnerabilities for a variety of products. 
Security Recruiting|SecurityHeadhunter provides search and recruitment services for information security professionals. 
VAR Security Solutions|Security in Motion provides IT security solutions included value added resale of security technology products. 
Application Security, Security Training|Security Innovation provides application security training, software security assessments and consulting to organizations globally. Organizations rely on its assessment and training solutions to make the use of software systems safer in the most challenging environments - whether in Web applications, IoT devices, or the cloud. 
Security Consulting|Security Management Partners provides security and IT assurance-consulting services. 
ICS/IoT Security|SecurityMatters provides a platform solution for anomaly detection that includes support for industrial control and SCADA environments. 
Security Training|Security Mentor provides a range of Web-based security awareness training for corporate employees. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance, Penetration Testing|SecurityMetrics provides PCI DSS, HIPAA, and data security compliance assessments. 
Managed Security Services|Security on Demand provides a range of managed and on-premise security services including security operations and cloud security. 
Security Training|Security Orb provides training and information on security and privacy-related issues. 
Security Recruiting|SecurityRecruiter provides a range of search and recruiting services for information security professionals. 
Security Consulting|Security Risk Solutions provides information security and compliance consulting services. 
Vulnerability Management|Security Scorecard provides a threat management system for collecting security-related information on the enterprise. 
Threat Intelligence|SecurityTracker provides free and premium security threat and vulnerability advisory information. 
Security Training|Security University provides hands-on performance based Qualified/ Information Security Professional and Qualified/ Information Assurance “Certificate Programs of Mastery”, CISSP preparation and CompTIA certification training. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Security Weaver offers governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) solutions for SAP users. 
Security Consulting, Security Recruiting|Secur1ty provides a social platform for connecting customers with security experts on demand. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Threat Intelligence|Securonix provides a platform for collecting and analyzing cyber security intelligence for monitoring and threat detection. 
Security R&D|Securosis is an independent security research and advisory firm offering insights into Web 2.0, APT protection, and security investment. 
Two-Factor Authentication, CA/PKI Solutions|SecuTech provides a range of products related to software licensing, multi-factor authentication, one time password, smartphone authentication and card readers. 
Identity and Access Management, Governance, Risk, and|SecZetta provides a range of security consulting services, and implementation services in identity, access, and privileged account management. 
Secure File Sharing|SendSafely offers a simple way to securely exchange encrypted files and confidential email with anyone on the web. SendSafely uses end-to-end encryption to protect files before they are transferred, and a split-key encryption model ensures that encrypted files and the keys needed to decrypt those files are kept separate at all times. Users can securely exchange highly sensitive files with the comfort of knowing their data won’t be exposed to anyone - not even SendSafely. 
Secure File Sharing|SendThisFile provides a secure file transfer solution through an encrypted, trusted intermediary in the cloud. 
Data Encryption|Senetas provides defense-grade encryption solutions for government and commercial customers. 
VAR Security Solutions|Sengex provides a range of security solutions for mobile and data protection through partner integration. 
Infrastructure Security, ICS/IoT Security, Vulnerability|Senrio is an enterprise network management company that detects install-gaps, licensing volume mismatches, and rogue devices. 
Threat Intelligence|SenseCy is a division of Terrogence that provides cyber intelligence services based on open, human, and technical intelligence sources. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Sense of Security provides a range of IT security, governance, compliance, and penetration testing services. 
Endpoint Security|SentinelOne provides endpoint security from advanced threats using predictive execution inspection. 
Network Monitoring, Incident Response, Threat Intelligence,|Sentryo is a software vendor providing cybersecurity and situation awareness solutions dedicated to industrial networks and the Internet of Things. Headquaters Sentryo Headquarter 66 Boulevard Niels Bohr, Bâtiment CEI 1 – CS 52132 69603 Cedex, Villeurbanne France Tel: 33 9 70 46 96 94 Executives Thierry Rouquet serves as CEO and Laurent Hausermann serves as the COO of Sentryo. Thierry was the CEO of Arkoon Network Security. Laurent spent the last 15 years creating cybersecurity products to defend large and small organizations and was the CTO of Arkoon Networks. History Sentryo was founded in 2014 by Thierry Rouquet and Laurent Hausermann. Sentryo is headquatered in Lyon, France and has offices in Germany and USA Key Competitors Fire Tech Systems, BTS Group, Softpath Technologies Products and Services Sentryo has developed ICS CyberVision, a unique and innovative network monitoring solution that provides visibility, integrity and security for industrial control systems. Sentryo ICS CyberVision is a network monitoring and threat intelligence platform that provides cyber-resilience for Industrial Control Systems (ICS) and SCADA networks. The solution is made up of sensors, central data visualization and analytics software. It passively analyses industrial network communications, provides meaningful information about network assets, advanced anomaly detection and alerts in real-time Website http://www.sentryo.net SEPPmail (Alpha Version 0.2 – 06/28/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Email Security Brief Overview SEPPmail provides email security solutions for encryption, digital signature, and managed PKI. 
Email Security|SEPPmail provides email security solutions for encryption, digital signature, and managed PKI. 
Mobile Security, Hardware/Embedded Security|Sequitur Labs provides secure hardware-assisted mobile application and advanced device management solutions. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|Sera-Brynn provides PCI DSS QSA services as well as security risk management consulting. 
Secure File Sharing, Content Protection, Endpoint Security,|Sertaintry offers developers an ability to embed intelligence into data-files, empowering data with an ability to act and react to its environment. 
Cloud Security, Penetration Testing, Mobile Security, Network|SEWORKS provides offensive and defensive app security that ensures mobile and web apps are safe from dangerous hacking threats that can destroy intellectual property and expose sensitive user information. 
Web Security, Web Application Firewall|Shaka provides Web security, load balancing, acceleration, and related network security product solutions. 
Web Security, DDOS Security|Shape Security provides technology for protecting Websites from sophisticated attacks. 
DDOS Security|Sharktech provides a gateway solution for protecting against distributed denial of service attacks. 
Vulnerability Management|Shavlik provides patch management solutions for operating systems, virtual systems, and applications. 
Cloud Security|ShiftLeft is a cloud security solutions company that creates solutions specific to each version of each application. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Shift Technology is a start-up that specializes in insurance fraud detection. 
ICS/IoT Security|Siemens provides solutions for energy, electrification, and automation, including cyber security for power grid. 
SIEM|Siemplify provides a holistic Security Operations Platform that empowers security analysts to work smarter and respond faster. 
SIEM, Infrastructure Security|Sift Security is a enterprise security startup that is leveraging big data and advanced analytics to enable enterprises to identify, prioritize and investigate risks inside their enterprise. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|SignaCert provides product solutions for automated continuous monitoring of IT and security compliance. 
Web Aplication Firewall|Signal Sciences is a software as a service platform providing security monitoring and defense for web applications. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Signifyd uses big data, machine learning and domain expertise that helps online merchants provide a friction-free buying experience by shifting fraud liability from merchants to Signifyd. 
Voice Security|Silent Circle provides encrypted communications for mobile, video, and voice services. 
Threat Intelligence|Silobreaker provides an app for security and intelligence professionals to keep track of open source data from the Web. 
Security Recruiting|Silverbull provides search and recruiting services for cyber security, managed service, and IT professionals. 
Identity and Access Management as a Service (IDaaS)|Simeio is a complete Identity and Access Management (IAM) solution provider that engages securely with anyone, anywhere, anytime, with an unparalleled “service first” philosophy. 
Security Consulting|Singular Security provides a suite of security and compliance consulting services including risk analysis management and vulnerability assessment. 
Endpoint Security|Sirrix AG Security Technologies provides a range of IT security products including endpoint security, trusted VPN, and voice encryption. 
Web Security, Web Application Firewall|SiteLock provides Website security solutions including a Web application firewall and scanner. 
Vulnerability Management|6Scan provides automated vulnerability detection and mitigation of malware on Websites. 
Security Training|Skillbridge Security provides a range of cyber security training services including tailored courses. 
Vulnerability Management, Firewall/Security Policy Management|Skybox Security provides an integrated cybersecurity management platform rooted in analytics, modeling and simulation used to manage vulnerabilities, threats, security policy, firewalls and firewall changes. 
Mobile Security|With Symantec’s acquisition of Skycure, the Skycure product is now called Symantec Endpoint Protection Mobile (SEP Mobile). SEP Mobile offers comprehensive, accurate and effective mobile threat defense (MTD) solution, delivering superior depth of threat intelligence to help predict, detect and protect against the broadest range of existing and unknown threats. 
Cloud Security|Skyhigh Networks provides cloud security and enablement to allow enterprises to safely adopt cloud services while meeting their security, compliance, and governance requirements. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Firewalls, Web Security|Two-Factor Authentication|SMS PASSCODE provides multifactor authentication solutions for remote access and cloud applications. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Socure provides social biometric solutions for identity verification and on-line fraud detection. 
Identity and Access Management|Soffid provides an identity and access management platform supporting identity governance across the enterprise. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Software AG provides a range of software products and services including business and IT transformation, analytics, integration, and a GRC platform. 
Mainframe Security|Software Diversified Services provides mainframe software and multi-platform security including encryption. 
VPN/Secure Access|Soha Systems provides an enterprise secure access solution for third parties and employees. 
Vulnerability Management, Security Information Event|In addition to network performance, application, and database monitoring, SolarWinds offers IT security and compliance solutions. 
Endpoint Security|Soliton Systems develops technology for IT security, remote live broadcasting and special unique embedded solutions. 
Threat Intelligence, Secure File Sharing|Soltra provides a threat intelligence platform for trusted sharing primarily in the financial services industry. 
Managed Security Services, Vulnerability Management, Security|Solutionary, an NTT Group Company, provides managed security services and related professional services for compliance and enterprise security using its cloud-based ActiveGuard platform. 
Data Leakage Prevention|Somansa provides a range of network and endpoint DLP solutions for the enterprise. 
Data Forensics, Network Monitoring|SomerData provides law enforcement solutions for surveillance and communications. 
Application Security|Sonatype provides open source dev/ops tools including Nexus firewall for software development organizations. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Sonavation designs and manufactures biometric fingerprint sensors using ultrasound technology. 
Firewall Platform, Email Security|SonicWALL, Inc. provides internet security solutions. The Company designs and develops information technology and intelligent network security solutions. SonicWALL serves small and large enterprises in education, government, healthcare, telecommunications, retail, and hospitality sectors worldwide. 
Secure File Sharing|Soonr, part of Autotask, provides a cloud-based secure file sharing service supporting enterprise and mobility usage. 
Endpoint Security, Unified Threat Management, Web Security,|Sophos provides a range of IT security products including unified threat management, next-generation firewall, and endpoint protections focused on malware. 
Information Assurance|Sotera is a national security technology company that delivers solutions including cyber security/information assurance. 
Mobile Security|SOTI provides mobile device management and mobile security for enterprise and IoT. 
Threat Intelligence|Spamhaus is a non-profit organization focused on tracking Spammers and supporting anti-Spam activities across the world through threat intelligence. 
Cloud Security, ICS/IoT Security, Anti-Malware Tools|SparkCognition is a Cognitive Security Analytics company. They're applying Machine Learning & AI to Cloud Security and the Internet of Things. 
Endpoint Security|Spikes Security offers Web security and malware elimination through a browser isolation system. 
Penetration Testing|Spirent provides a range of network and telecommunications testing and evaluation services and solutions including penetration testing for mobile, IoT, and cloud. 
Data Leakage Prevention, Endpoint Security|Spirion provides a suite of solutions focused on managing sensitive information and preventing data leakage prevention. 
Security Information Event Management, Security Analytics|Splunk provides operational intelligence through a range of Big Data analysis tools for monitoring, inspecting, and visualizing event logs. 
Security Consulting|Spohn is a professional services company offering security audit and assessment services in addition to telecommunications and training. 
VPN/Secure Access|Spotflux provides a secure, managed connection to the Internet for mobile devices and desktop computers. 
Email Security, Information Assurance, Password Security,|SpyCloud helps businesses of all sizes prevent data breaches and account takeover attacks by alerting when employee or company assets have been compromised. 
Security Consulting|IntelliGO is a Canadian firm providing IT and network security consulting and advisory services. 
Security Analytics|Sqrrl is a security analytics company that enables organizations to target, hunt, and disrupt advanced cyber threats. 
Network Monitoring, Security Analytics, Intrusion|SS8 provides enterprise breach detection and communication security through high-definition historical network analysis, correlation, and forensics. 
Two-Factor Authentication, VPN/Secure Access|SSH provides SSH key management, privileged access control, identity and access, and encryption solutions. 
Application Security, DDoS Security|StackPath is an intelligent Web services platform for security, speed and scale. 
Vulnerability Management, Governance, Risk, and Compliance,|StackRox provides an adaptive threat protection for containers. StackRox delivers a groundbreaking security platform using instrumentation and sophisticated machine learning to protect the agile enterprise. StackRox enables security teams to see containers in high resolution; defend against threats such as code injection, privilege escalation, malicious lateral movement, and data exfiltration; and streamline security operations – all with a single platform. 
DDOS Security|Staminus provides hybrid DDOS protection and mitigation services. 
Security Recruiting|Stanley Reid & Co. provides technical search and recruitment services including for cyber security positions. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Star Lab Corp. is an embedded security company that protects devices and systems operating in open, hostile environments. 
VAR Security Solutions|Starlink is a security advisory and value added solutions provider located in the Middle East. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|STEALTHbits provides a range of data access governance, identity, and management solutions for the enterprise. 
Secure File Sharing|STEALTH Software provides security protection for Microsoft SharePoint and .NET applications. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance|Stickman Consulting is a security consulting firm that specializes in PCI DSS compliance. 
Security Consulting|STI Group provides a range of strategic and tactical information security services for clients. 
Network Access Control|StillSecure offers a network access control (NAC) platform called Safe Access that secures endpoints connecting to a network. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|Stormpath provides a user management API that allows developers to integrate authentication for users and roles. 
Information Assurance|Strategic Cyber Solutions (SCS) provides a range of cyber security/information assurance services for government including cloud data analytics. 
Security Consulting|Stratum provides information security consulting with focus on application and network security services. 
Two-Factor Authentication|StrikeForce Technologies provides out-of-band authentication, anti-keylogging, and mobile security solutions. 
Data Encryption, File Encryption, Digital Signatures, Strong|StrongKey is making data breaches irrelevant. By providing strong authentication, encryption, and digital signatures, StrongKey ensures that data, no matter the format, remains encrypted and protected at the highest possible level and redefines the way businesses and government agencies secure their information against the inevitability of a breach. StrongKey is trusted by some of the largest companies and critical government agencies around the globe. 
Incident Response, Security Consulting, Digital Forensics|Stroz Freidberg offers investigative, forensic, and response services to enterprise executives and litigators involved in complex cyber security incidents. 
Security Consulting|S21sec is a multinational firm that provides a range of cyber security services and technology across many industries. 
Web Security, Web Application Firewall, DDOS Security,|Sucuri provides protection for Websites, malware removal, and network asset security. 
Security Information Event Management, Security Analytics|Sumo Logic provides cloud-based log management and analytics leveraging machine-generated Big Data. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, PCI DSS Compliance|Sunera provides IT and risk advisory, information security, and corporate/regulatory governance consulting services. 
Managed Security Services, Security Consulting, Cloud Security|Sungard Availability Services is a provider of IT production and recovery with offices in 9 countries. The company uses its experience in recovery to design, build and run production environments that are more resilient and available. 
Anti-Malware Tools|SUPERAntiSpyware offers a software package that helps users understand what is running on their PC. 
Identity and Access Management, Two-Factor Authentication|SurePassID provides cloud-based identity and access management for mobile and hybrid cloud use. 
Secure File Sharing|Surevine provides a secure collaboration solution called Threatvine for enterprise. 
Threat Intelligence, Security Analytics|SurfWatch provides a risk analytics API that translates raw cyber data into actionable intelligence. 
Information Assurance|Swain Techs provides a range of engineering, managed services, and cyber security/information assurance consulting services. 
Incident Response, Security Automation|Swimlane provides an automated incident response and security operations capability. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Swivel Secure provides a strong authentication platform for cloud, Web, VPN, and desktop. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services, Incident|Sword & Shield provides a range of managed and professional cyber security services. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Syferlock provides secure, tokenless two-factor authentication solutions using a grid technology. 
Digital Forensics, PCI DSS/Compliance|Sylint provides cyber security consulting services with emphasis on digital forensics. 
Endpoint Security, Cloud Security, Mobile Security, Data|Symantec Corporation (NASDAQ: SYMC), the world's leading cyber security company, helps organizations, governments and people secure their most important data wherever it lives. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Symmetry manages complex SAP® implementations on a global scale for the world’s leading enterprises in industries like healthcare, financial services, retail, manufacturing, automotive and more. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|Symosis helps customers manage risk on emerging application, mobile, and cloud platforms through assessments, gap analysis, and due diligence. 
Bug Bounty Support (Crowd Security Intelligence),|Synack provides enterprise customers with continuous cyber vulnerability exploitation from a vetted, crowd-sourced team of ethical hackers from around the world. 
Mobile Security, Infrastructure Security|SyncDog is a software vendor for building secure infrastructure frameworks. 
Secure File Sharing|Syncplicity provides cloud synchronization and sharing solutions for the enterprise. 
Incident Response|Syncurity Networks provides incident response solutions to help remediate breaches and manage enterprise risk. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Security R&D|Syndis is a security think tank in Iceland offering a range of services including penetration testing. 
Security Consulting|Synercomm is an IT, mobility, infrastructure, audit, testing, and security consulting firm. 
Application Security|Synopsys provides a range of application security tools for test and analysis. 
VAR Security Solutions|Syntegrity provides a range of security products and professional services including support for identity and access management. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Sypris includes a division that manufactures trusted hardware, as well as a division that focuses on cyber security solutions for aerospace and defense. 
Security Consulting|SecurityExperts is a boutique provider of IT compliance and security consulting services. 
PCI DSS/Compliance|Sysnet provides a merchant platform and consulting services for ensuring compliance PCI DSS standards. 
Mobile Security, Information Assurance|Inpixon provides platforms and tools for enterprise delivery of software and wireless protection based on the location and context of the users, with emphasis on serving US Federal Government customers. 
Vulnerability Management|TaaSera build runtime behavior detection solutions to proactively identify vulnerabilities. 
Digital Forensics, Hardware/Embedded Security|Tactical Network Solutions provides digital forensic snapshots and analysis of memory and firmware on devices and systems. 
Industry Analysis|TAG Cyber provides cyber security industry analysis, training, consulting, and media services. 
Security Consulting|Taino Consulting group provides a range of security risk management services including both cyber and physical. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting|Tangible Security provides a range of security consulting services including assessments and virtual CISO for government and commercial customers. 
Endpoint Security, Security Analytics|Tanium provides real-time endpoint protection through data collection and threat analysis. 
Security Consulting, Training/Awareness, PCI-DSS/Compliance,|Tapestry Technologies is a security company that offers policy, training, and security integration that are held to DoD standards. 
Email Security|TargetProof provides a verification solution for securing email and preventing fraud. 
Wireless Security|Tarlogic provides a range of tools and services for wireless network security assessment. 
Managed Security Services|Tata Group is an Indian multinational conglomerate, whose Communications Group offers enterprise managed security services. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance, Penetration Testing|TBG Security provides security consulting services to assist with compliance in HIPAA, PCI, and related frameworks. 
Digital Forensics|TCS Forensics provides data forensics for computers and mobiles, data recovery, and related services. 
Security Consulting, Information Assurance|TDI provides a range of security technology, policy compliance, and audit consulting services. 
Security Training|TeachPrivacy offers a range of security and privacy courses and training. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|TechDemocracy is a global cyber risk assurance solutions provider whose DNA is rooted in cyber advisory, managed and implementation services. The company provides advisory, implementation, and managed services in the areas of business intelligence, clinical analytics, data warehousing, security, service oriented architecture, business process management, identity and access management, and E-business suite. It serves public sector, utility, financial, healthcare, pharmaceutical, manufacturing, insurance, and retail clients worldwide. 
Information Assurance, Penetration Testing, Security R&D|TechGuard provides a range of cyber security and information assurance solutions for commercial and government customers. 
VAR Security Solutions|TechLab provides a range of managed and value added data security products and services including mobile device security. 
Digital Forensics, Data Destruction|TechFusion offers data forensics and eDiscovery services including erasure verification and evidence preservation. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services|Tech Mahindra is an IT outsourcing and services company that includes an information security services practice. 
Cryptographic Key Management, Data Encryption, Quantum|Tecsec’s focus is on Information Security and Information Access Management, enforced through cryptography. TecSec provides consultation and design services, as well as software and hardware products based upon the company’s 8th generation, standards-based Constructive Key Management (CKM®) technology, leveraging our large library of patents and IP. TecSec, working within published ANSI and NIST Standards, has developed a way to cryptographically protect data at the object level, including financial transactions. The CKM technology has been recognized by ANSI as quantum resistant. 
Managed Security Services|Telefonica is a broadband and telecommunications company that includes a managed security services offering. 
Two-Factor Authentication|TeleSign provides mobile identity solutions including a two- factor authentication toolkit. 
Network Monitoring, Threat Detection, Traffic Capture, Data|Telesoft designs and manufactures highly scalable network visibility tools for for National ISP/Telco and Large Enterprise for anomaly detection, incident response, and threat detection in real time, at scale, in networks running at multiples of 100Gbps. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance, Information Assurance,|Telos offers a range of security and information assurance solutions including secure mobility and identity. 
Managed Security Services|TELUS is a global telecommunications company in Canada that offers a range of managed security services. 
Network Security|Tempered Networks provides an enterprise network security orchestration solution based on the host identity protocol (HIP). 
Security Consulting, Security Recruiting, Information Assurance,|Templar Shield provides a range of security consulting, managed security, and recruiting services including a GRC practice. 
Vulnerability Management, ICS/IoT Security, Security|Tenable provides advanced enterprise vulnerability scanning and management through its Nessus vulnerability scanner and SecurityCenter CV platform. 
Information Assurance|Tenacity Solutions offers high-end cyber security/information assurance consulting services to the National Security market. 
IT Infrastructure Utility, Network Security Solutions|TenFour delivers global private domain IT infrastructure-as-a-service for enterprise customers using an IT Infrastructure Utility model, including cyber security solution offerings. 
Secure File Sharing|TeraDact provides secure information management and sharing with redaction and extraction. 
DLP, Insider Threats|Teramind is a leading user behavior analytics and risk mitigation platform with comprehensive functionality for user monitoring, forensics, and data loss prevention. 
Secure File Sharing, Content Protection|Terbium Labs provides a fingerprinting solution that detects stolen intellectual property. 
Security Training|Terranova Worldwide Corporation provides security awareness training solutions for enterprise. 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance, Governance, Risk,|Tevora provides security consulting, risk management, and governance/compliance solutions for enterprise customers. 
Information Assurance, Incident Response, CA/PKI Solutions|The Thales Group is a French multinational aerospace, defense, and space contractor that offers a range of cyber and data security solutions. 
Mainframe Security|North Carolina-based Workspace-as-a-service firm for global teams and organizations in need of Virtual Desktop Management solutions. 
ICS/IoT Security, Security Analytics|ThetaRay provides a Big Data analytics platform and solution for cyber security in financial services and critical infrastructure. 
Endpoint Security, Network Monitoring|ThinAir is an intelligent endpoint security solution built to keep your data safe and under your control. 
Threat Intelligence|ThreatBook is a Chinese company specializing in cyber threat intelligence company, dedicated to providing real-time, accurate and actionable threat intelligence to block, detect and prevent attacks. 
Threat Intelligence|ThreatConnect provides a cyber threat intelligence platform for analysis and collaboration. 
Threat Intelligence, Penetration Testing|Threat Intelligence provides a range of managed threat intelligence services for the enterprise including penetration testing. 
Web Fraud Prevention|ThreatMetrix focuses on preventing Web fraud via its virtual TrustDefender platform and real-time intelligence network. 
Vulnerability Management|ThreatModeler Software, Inc provides security risk management solutions for designers and developers via threat modeling tools. 
Threat Intelligence|ThreatQuotient (ThreatQ) offers a platform for managing and correlating internal and external threat intelligence. 
Security Training|ThreatReady Resources works to build a culture of cyberawareness and assists companies in creating a human firewall as an effective first line of defense against cyber attacks. 
Cloud Security|Threat Stack provides solutions for security monitoring, logging, and alerting of cloud services including AWS. 
Endpoint Security, Cloud Security|ThreatSTOP is a cloud-based network security company. 
Email Security, Security Analytics, Anti-Malware Tools,|ThreatTrack Security provides a sandbox-based solution for the detection of suspicious or malicious behavior. 
Security Consulting|360CyberSecure provides a range of cyber security consulting, including risk assessment services. 
Application Security, Governance, Risk, and Compliance|360 Security Group provides new-generation security products and security services for the government and enterprises. 
Password/Privilege Management|Thycotic’s award winning Privilege Account Management solutions minimize privileged credential risk, limits user privileges and controls applications on endpoints and servers. 
Security Analytics, Security Event Information Management|TIBCO provides a range of business intelligence and infrastructure solutions, including data security. 
Security Information Event Management|Tier-3 provides an enterprise SIEM solution that supports data collection, analysis, correlation, and visibility. 
Security Consulting|TS-WAY provides a range of security consulting services including offensive, investigation, and intelligence. 
Cloud Security|Tigera, Inc. provides an open policy-driven networking solution for cloud native applications. 
Web Security, Vulnerability Management|Tinfoil Security offers a developer-friendly service for scanning a website to detect vulnerabilities. 
Security Consulting, Security Recruiting|Tiro Security provides staffing and consulting services with emphasis on security assessments and virtual CISO. 
Web Application Firewall, Anti- Malware Tools, Application|TitanHQ provides high quality, reasonably priced network security, web filtering, malware blocking and email anti-spam solutions Headquaters TitanHQ C/O Copperfasten Technologies 1st Floor, Mazars Place Salthill, Galway, Ireland Tel: (813) 304-2544 TitanHQ C/O Titan Technology Solutions US INC 400 N Ashley DR STE 1900 Tampa FL 33602, USA Tel: (813) 304-2544 Executives Ronan Kavanagh serves as the CEO of TitanHQ. Sean Doherty is Head of Research and Development and co-founder of TitanHQ. History The company was incorporated in 1999 and is based in Galway, Ireland. TitanHQ also has an office in USA. In 2004, the firm started to sell its first email filtering appliance. TitanHQ protects over 7,500 businesses and works daily with over 1,500 MSP’s.operating in 129 countries and includes SMBs, schools, universities, colleges, ISPs, banks and government. Key Competitors Kaspersky, McAfee, Fidelis, OpenDNS, DNS Filter Products and Services TitanHQ, develops internet security software solutions. Its products include WebTitan, a software that filters web content from malware, phishing, and viruses; SpamTitan, a clam antivirus that detects spam emails and provides email protection; and ArcTitan, an email archiving in the cloud that secures, encrypts, audits international legal and industry standards complaint. The company serves service providers, education, business, healthcare, hospitality, retail, finance, transportation, and non- profit business organizations. Website https://www.titanhq.com Titania (Alpha Version 0.2 – 07/18/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Governance, Risk, and Compliance Brief Overview Titania provides audit compliance software for network devices, servers, and workstations. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|Titania provides audit compliance software for network devices, servers, and workstations. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Titan IC supplies hardware accelerated regular expression processing technologies for the cybersecurity industry. 
Secure File Sharing, Data Leakage Prevention|TITUS offers a range of solutions for classifying, protecting, and sharing messages, files, and other business information with emphasis on Microsoft Office products. 
ICS/IoT Security|Tofino, part of Belden, provides a range of industrial control system (ICS) and SCADA cyber security products. 
Firewall Platform, Unified Threat Management, Anti-Malware|Topsec Science is a Chinese company providing a range of information security solutions. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Topgallant Partners provides a range of security consulting services including assessment, audit, and risk analysis. 
Anti-Malware Tools|TopSpin develops devices providing advanced malware deception and detection technology. 
VAR Security Solutions|Torus Technologies provides valued added resale security solutions along with a range of security consulting offerings. 
Anti-Malware Tools|Total Defense is an anti-virus and Internet security suite for PC devices, smart phones, and tablets. 
VAR Security Solutions|Towerwall offers a range of cyber security professional service and managed solutions through partnerships with security technology partners. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|TraceSecurity offers IT governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) solutions to protect critical data and address IT mandates. 
Penetration Testing, Security Training|Trail of Bits provides expert cyber security research and training services. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Biometrics|Transmit Security offers programmable biometric authentication solutions. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Deception Technology|TrapX provides a platform for identifying, disrupting, and analyzing APT attacks in the enterprise. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Mobile Security, Content Protection, Cloud|Trend Micro is a content security solution provider addressing endpoints, servers, and cloud. 
Secure File Sharing|Tresys offers products and services for secure information sharing across organizational domains. 
Secure Messaging|Trineba Technologies provides an instant messenger app that is built on a secure API base that allows for high trust and surveillance avoidance. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention, Cloud Security, Infrastructure|Tripwire is a leading provider of integrity assurance solutions that improve security, compliance and IT operations in enterprises, industrial organizations, service providers and government agencies. 
Security Recruiting|Tri-Secure offers comprehensive cyber security recruiting and staffing services in the UK. 
Endpoint Security|Triumfant provides advanced threat detection and remediation solutions for endpoints. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Trojan Horse Security provides a range of security consulting services including penetration testing and compliance assessments. 
Application Security, Data Security|TrulyProtect provides an encryption-based software data security solution that integrates with various applications to protect IP. 
Security Consulting|TruSec provides a range of security consulting services including IT compliance assurance and IT risk management. 
Threat Intelligence, Secure File Sharing, Threat Management,|TruSTAR is an intelligence platform that helps organizations leverage multiple sources of threat intelligence and fuse it with historical event data to prioritize and enrich investigations. TruSTAR uses machine learning and automation to operationalize data throughout an analyst’s workflow, freeing up time for higher-priority events. The most valuable security data is often locked inside silos in which TruSTAR breaks down these silos with its Enclave knowledge management architecture. Enclaves give complex teams customization, integration, and granular access controls that enable collaboration. TruSTAR is the technology infrastructure that powers many of the U.S.’s largest ISACs and ISAOs, and has enterprise customers that span across Finance, Retail, Healthcare, Aerospace, and IT. 
Identity and Acces Management, Two-Factor Authentication|Trusona develops a cloud identity suite that provides enterprise, Omni-channel authentication. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, PCI DSS/Compliance,|TrustedSec provides a range of security consulting services including penetration testing. 
Endpoint Security|Trusted Knight provides browser security protection including keystroke logging prevention. 
Security Information Event Management|Trusted Metrics provides a cloud-based SIEM solution with support for log correlation, intrusion detection, and related capabilities. 
Privacy Management|TrustArc provides assessment services and platform support for data privacy management. The company provides services to help corporations update their privacy management processes so they comply with government laws and best practices. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Trustev, now part of TransUnion, offers a platform that detects and prevents on-lone fraud based on contextual pattern matching. 
Mobile Security, Anti-Malware Tools|TrustGo, part of Baidu, provides an Android mobile security product that provides app scanning, and other security and privacy features for users. 
Two-Factor Authentication|TRUSTID provides automatic caller identity validation by checking call source to reduce potential fraud. 
Data Encryption, Operating System Security|Trustifier provides kernel-level security protections including mandatory access controls for UNIX systems. 
Mobile Security, Anti-Malware Tools, AI|Trustlook provides AI-powered cybersecurity solutions for mobile devices, network appliances, and the IoT. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Trustonic provides a secure execution solution that can be embedded in mobile devices and utilizes trusted hardware. 
Security Analytics, Endpoint Security|Trustpipe offers endpoint security via network traffic scans and analysis using an attack taxonomy. 
Anti-Malware Tools|TrustPort is a security software company offering anti-virus, anti- spyware, and related Internet security solutions for home and office. 
PCI DSS/Compliance, Managed Security Services, Web Security,|Trustwave offers a wide range of compliance solutions, security products, and managed services, with emphasis on Payment Card Industry requirements. 
Firewall Platform, Infrastructure Security|Tufin provides security policy orchestration with emphasis on automating and accelerating network configuration changes in gateway components such as firewalls and routers. 
Security Consulting|TwelveDot provides a range of security consulting with emphasis on mobile and cloud. 
Security Analytics|21CT provides a behavioral analytic fraud detection solution that supports enterprise investigations. 
Cloud Security|Twistlock provides vulnerability detection, policy enforcement, and other protections for virtual containers. 
Security Consulting, VAR Security Solutions|2B Secure is a security consulting firm that provides a range of value added reseller solutions in the area of information security. 
Two-Factor Authentication|2FA provides a range of two-factor authentication solutions including fingerprint and one-time password. 
Identity and Access Management, Managed Security Services,|2Keys provides a range of managed and professional services with emphasis on user authentication and identity attributes 
Security Consulting, PCI DSS/Compliance, Penetration Testing|2-sec provides a range of security consulting offers including penetration testing and PCI DSS services. 
PCI, GRC, IM&S|InfoGard provides assistance in a variety of industries to help organizations comply with various standards. 
Identity and Access Management|UnboundID provides an identity and access management platform designed to focus on Web scale customer volume. 
Application Security|Unicom offers everything software developers need to deploy their application as a complete platform solution. 
Identity and Access Management|UnifyID, Inc. develops identity application based on implicit authentication. 
Secure Remote Access|Uniken provides a security platform that integrates identity, authentication, and remote access into secure application tunnels. 
Network Access Control, Web Application Firewall|United Security Providers offers network access control solutions for business customers. 
Information Assurance, Data Security|Unisys is a technology company that includes cyber security solutions for enterprise customers and government. 
Authentication|Univaultage provides a variety of solutions to protect sensitive data and store passwords securely. 
Infrastructure Security, Vulnerability Management|UpGuard Inc. provides a platform that provides the CyberSecurity Threat Assessment Report (CSTAR). 
Cloud Security, Threat Intelligence, Machine Learning|Uplevel combines case management, threat intelligence management, workflow orchestration, and analytics to automate threat responses. 
Firewall|Untangle provides open source products and solutions to simplify your firewall. 
ICS/IoT Security, Cloud Security|Upstream Security Ltd. develops and operates a cloud-based cyber-security platform for connected and autonomous vehicles. 
Security Consulting|Urbane Security provides information security consulting services including defensive, offensive, and compliance offerings. 
Digital Forensics|US Data Forensics provides digital forensics and investigative support in acquiring, analyzing, and preserving data. 
Network Monitoring, IoT|Utimaco helps telecommunication providers with lawful data retention and interception. 
Email Security|Vade Security provides email security for corporations of all sizes, including ISPs, hosting companies, and OEMs. 
Email Security, Threat Intelligence|Valimail Inc. provides automated email authentication services. The company’s flagship product is Valimail Enforce™, the only FedRAMP-authorized email authentication service, which authenticates legitimate emails and blocks phishing attacks in order to protect brands, their employees, and consumers. Valimail authenticates billions of messages a month for some of the world's biggest companies, in finance, transportation, health care, manufacturing, media, technology, and more; several U.S. federal agencies use its service as well. 
Security Consulting, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|ValueMentor is a specialist cyber security consulting and services company providing Security Testing, Managed Security Services, PCI DSS & GDPR services and a range of Cyber Risk. 
Information Assurance|Van Dyke Technology Group provides cyber security/information assurance professional services for program and policy, testing, and other areas. 
Cloud Security, Infrastructure Security, Identity and Access|Vanguard Integrity Professionals is an independent provider of enterprise security software solutions that address complex security and regulatory compliance challenges. Headquaters VANGUARD INTEGRITY PROFESSIONALS 6625 S. Eastern Ave. Suite 100 Las Vegas, NV 89119-3930 Tel: (702) 794-0014 Executives Ronn H. Bailey is the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Technology Officer of Vanguard Integrity Professionals, is a recognized expert in cybersecurity and information technology. Bailey has been the CEO and CTO of Vanguard for more than 30 years. History Vanguard Integrity Professionals was founded by Ronn H. Bailey in 1986. Vanguard Integrity Professionals is the largest independent provider of enterprise security software Key Competitors Proofpoint, Bitdefender, Neturion Products and Services Vanguard provides Cyber security and Compliance solutions to secure the Enterprise Mainframe Environment. Vanguard provides various Security Softwares, Professional Services and Education and Training to companies. The different softwares provided by Vanguard are used for the following services: • Administration • Audit and Compliance • Authentication • Cloud Security • Identity and Access Management • SIEM • Penetration Testing. Vanguard also provides other services like Migrations services Remediation Services, Security Assesssments, Staff Augmentation and Education Training with different online courses and instructors schemes available for selection as per the customers requirement. Website http://www.go2vanguard.com Vaporstream (Alpha Version 0.2 – 08/02/18 – No Vendor Approval) TAG Cyber Controls Secure Messaging Brief Overview Vaporstream provides a platform and service for securely streaming messages without leaving traces on devices or servers. 
Secure Messaging|Vaporstream provides a platform and service for securely streaming messages without leaving traces on devices or servers. 
Information Assurance, Security Consulting|VariQ provides a range of cyber security/information assurance professional services for government customers. 
Firewall Platform, Cloud Security|vArmour provides software-based distributed security controls such as segmentation and deception to virtual and cloud environments. 
Secure File Sharing|Varonis provides solutions for data governance and protection via enterprise file sync and share, access monitoring, and related capabilities. 
Security Consulting, Security Training|Varutra offers a range of information security consulting and training services for enterprise customers. 
Two-Factor Authentication|VASCO provides solutions for strong authentication, digital signature, and identity management. 
Cloud Security, Data Encryption|Vaultive provides cloud and SaaS application data encryption protection via a network-level proxy solution. 
ICS/IoT Security, Security Analytics|VDOO is a mission-driven company established to change the face of IoT security, and aims to become the Security Authority (SA) for connected-devices. Having created a device-focused security framework, VDOO enables the cyber-security implementation and certification of IoT devices. 
Intrusion Detection/Prevention|Vectra Networks provides continuous automated cyber intrusion detection and reporting solutions. 
Data Encryption, CA/PKI Solutions|Venafi secures cryptographic keys and certificates by providing visibility and a fully automated, secure lifecycle with automated remediation. 
Information Assurance|Perspecta Labs, previously Vencore Labs, provides engineering and professional services in cyber security, analytics, smart grid, and information assurance. 
Security Incubator|VENUS Cybersecurity is a non-profit Canadian organization focused on providing innovation support for members. 
Firewall Platform, Unified Threat Management|Venustech provides a range of network security products including unified threat management, firewalls, and VPNs. 
Secure File Sharing|Vera provides a solution for securing data and files with encryption-based protections. 
Intrusion Detection and Prevention|Veracity Inc. provides end point Internet security solutions for industrial companies. It offers asset monitoring, anomaly detection, and real time alerting and mitigation solutions. 
Application Security, Penetration Testing|Veracode provides cloud-based application security products and services including code analysis and testing. 
Security Analytics|Veriato, formerly known as SpectorSoft, provides monitoring software to detect insider threats, employee fraud, and data breaches. 
Multi-Factor Biometric Authentication|Veridium's multi-factor authentication solutions use biometrics to safeguard your enterprise's most critical assets. Replace passwords with biometrics. 
Security Analytics, Network Monitoring|Verint provides a range of analytic hardware and software products and services for security, business intelligence, and surveillance industries. 
Information Assurance, Governance, Risk, and Compliance, PCI|Veris Group provides a range of cyber security/information assurance consulting services with emphasis on Federal Government customers. 
DDOS Security, Threat Intelligence, Infrastructure Security|Verisign provides Internet top-level domain services, as well as critical infrastructure protection including DDOS security. 
Managed Security Services, DDOS Security, Infrastructure|In addition to providing global telecommunications, wireless, and broadband services, the company also provides managed security services. 
Endpoint Security, Intrusion Detection, Penetration Testing|Verodin instruments security on the network, dynamically assessing the effectiveness of your security portfolio. 
Security Analytics|Context Relevant provides predictive data analytics to provide financial and security insights. 
Security Recruiting|Via Resource provides search and recruitment services in information security and risk management. 
Network Access Control|ViaScope provides network access control and related IP address management solutions. 
Cloud Security|Vidder offers a software defined perimeter solution that uses strong authentication and dynamic connectivity from a master controller. 
Security Training, Security Consulting, Compliance|VigiTrust is a GRC (Governance, Risk, and Compliance) SaaS service provider enabling organisations to achieve, maintain and continuously monitor compliance with industry standards & laws such as PCI DSS, Vendor Risk Management, Third Party Assurance, EU GDPR, HIPAA, ISO 27001 etc. Importantly, VigiTrust’s Award Winning GRC offering also includes eLearning programs and prides a portfolio of over 50+ titles on Cyber Security and Industry Standards. 
Managed Security Services, Incident Response|Vijilan offers a range of managed security services including monitoring and incident response. 
Data Encryption|Virgil Security provides encryption software tools to support authentication, verification, and data security. 
Application Security|Virsec provides next-generation data breach protection for applications including virtual patching. 
Email Security, Secure Messaging|Virtru provides secure email application technology that ensures digital private sharing. 
Managed Security Services, Governance, Risk, and Compliance,|VirtualArmour is a global Managed Services Provider (MSP) delivering customizable management of advanced network and security services to global businesses across numerous industry sectors. It is a trusted partner of several Fortune 500 organizations and uses only best-in-breed technology to protect and secure its clients. 
SAP Security, Application Security|Virtual Forge provides security scanning and risk identification solutions for SAP applications. 
Security Training|Visible Statement, part of Green Idea, provides 24/7 information security awareness solutions in multiple languages. 
Security Analytics, Information Assurance|Vistronix specializes in Big Data analysis solutions including a specialized focus on cyberspace and SIGINT operations. 
Content Protection|Vitrium provides document security and digital rights management protection for PDF files. 
Governance, Risk, and Compliance|VivoSecurity provides a solution for automated financial risk calculation of security risks. 
Two-Factor Authentication|VIZpin provides solutions for turning Bluetooth smartphones into access control components. 
Mobile Security|V-Key employs intrusion protection and intelligence technology to secure mobile applications. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Threat Intelligence, Cloud Security|VMRay is a cybersecurity company based in Boston, Massachusetts. The company provides both a cloud-based and on- premises product, VMRay Analyzer. 
Cloud Security, Mobile Security|VMware is a global leader in cloud infrastructure and business mobility. VMware accelerates customers’ digital transformation journey by enabling enterprises to master a software-defined approach to business and IT. With VMware solutions, organizations are creating exceptional experiences by mobilizing everything, responding faster to opportunities with modern data and apps hosted across hybrid clouds, and safeguarding customer trust with an architected-in approach to cybersecurity 
Security Consulting|Voodoo Security offers a range of security-related professional services for enterprise customers and security technology vendors. 
Data Encryption|Vormetric provides a range of encryption, key management, and data security solutions. 
Email Security, Secure File Sharing|Votiro provides a range of data security products including data sanitization tools for the enterprise. 
Security Analytics|Threatcare provides a platform for creating actionable intelligence through analytics. 
Two-Factor Authentication, Web Fraud Prevention|VU Security provides two-factor authentication solutions with behavioral analysis for many different platforms. 
Application Security Platform|Wallarm AI-powered Platform automates application protection and security testing for websites, microservices and APIs across public and private clouds. 
Password/Privilege Management|Wallix offers a range of privileged user access, password management, and related audit/compliance functions. 
Mobile Security, Threat Intelligence, Web Security Gateway,|Wandera’s web gateway for mobile provides organizations with enterprise mobile security and data management. 
Threat Intelligence, Security R&D|Wapack Labs provides cyber threat analysis, security research, and intelligence services. 
Application Security|Waratek provides application security through runtime application self-protection for Java as well as containers. 
Hardware/Embedded Security|Watchdata provides a range of digital authentication and transaction security products for mobile and e-commerce applications. 
Content Protection|Watchful Software provides DRM-based data security solutions for enterprise customers. 
Firewall Platform, Unified Threat Management, Network|WatchGuard Technologies provides network security and secure Wi-Fi solutions for small to medium-sized businesses and distributed enterprises including a unified threat management appliance, a network visibility solution, and secure wireless Access Points. 
ICS/IoT Security|Waterfall provides network security solutions for industrial control and SCADA applications. 
Endpoint Security, Data Encryption|Wave provides a range of data security solutions for the endpoint including a virtual smart card. 
Anti-Malware Tools, Endpoint Security, Web Security, Web|Webroot was one of the first to harness the cloud and artificial intelligence to protect businesses and individuals against cyber threats. Webroot provides a security solution for managed service providers and small businesses, who rely on Webroot for endpoint protection, network protection, and security awareness training. Webroot BrightCloud® Threat Intelligence Services are used by market leading companies like Cisco, F5 Networks, Citrix, Aruba, Palo Alto Networks, A10 Networks, and more. Leveraging the power of machine learning to protect millions of businesses and individuals, Webroot secures the connected world. Headquartered in Colorado, Webroot operates globally across North America, Europe, and Asia. Discover Smarter Cybersecurity® solutions at webroot.com. 
VAR Security Solutions|Westcon Group is a value added reseller (VAR) and distributor of network, unified communications, data center, and security solutions. 
Digital Forensics|Wetstone provides a range of malware discovery, data forensics, and security investigatory tools for eCrime investigation support. 
Identity and Access Management, Data Encryption|Wheel Systems offers IT security solutions that specializes in privileged access management, user authentication and authorization, and SSL/TLS encrypted traffic inspection. 
Application Security, Identity and Access Management|White Cloud Security provides software that identifies and ensures that only trusted apps are allowed to execute. 
Data Encryption|White Hawk Software protects mission critical software by tamper-proofing code and cryptographic keys against modifications at runtime and reverse engineering. 
Data Encryption, Application Security|whiteCryption (formerly Cryptanium) provides code integrity protection for apps, as well as a white-box cryptography library. 
Application Security, Web Security|WhiteHat Security provides a cloud-based technology platform for web application security. 
Web Fraud Prevention|Whiteops provides a solution to ensure that on-line advertising is not subjected to fraudulent use from botnets. 
Application Security|Whitewood enables its customers to take control of the generation of random numbers across their entire application infrastructure. 
Password/Privilege Management|WiActs provides NoPassword, a secure biometrics multi-factor authentication solution. 
Secure Messaging|Wickr provides encryption-based technology to senders of messages to ensure privacy and anonymity. 
Information Assurance|WidePoint provides mobility, telecom, and cyber security services for Federal, state, local, and enterprise customers, with emphasis on identity management. 
Data Encryption|WinMagic provides full-disk encryption software to protect sensitive information on desktops and laptops. 
Governance Risk, and Compliance, SAP Security|Winterhawk Consulting provides SAP GRC, penetration test, and audit consulting solutions. 
Security Consulting, Managed Security Services|Wipro provides IT services, consulting, and outsourcing, including a practice in IT security services. 
Security Information Event Management, Digital Forensics|WireX Systems is a provider of security investigations and network forensics solutions. 
CA/PKI Solutions, ICS/IoT Security|WISeKey provides digital information security, authentication, and identity management solutions for mobility and IoT. 
Security Consulting|Wizlynx Group provides a range of IT security services based on its Information Security Competence Center. 
CA/PKI Solutions, Data Security|wolfSSL provides an embedded SSL library and engine for applications, devices, IoT, and the cloud. 
Security Training|Wombat, a division of Proofpoint, is the leading provider of information security awareness and training software to help organizations teach their employees secure behavior. Their SaaS- based cybersecurity education solutions include integrated knowledge assessments, a library of simulated attacks and brief interactive training modules. Wombat’s solutions help organizations reduce successful phishing attacks and malware infections by up to 90%. 
VAR Security Solutions|Wontok provides value added services (VAS) and endpoint security solutions to protect business and government from malware and theft of data. 
Secure Messaging|WordSecure provides a secure messaging solution that transmits and protects messages and attachments. 
Secure File Sharing|Workshare provides secure file sharing and document collaboration platform applications. 
Database Encryption and Multi-Factor Authentication|WWPass provides a database encryption solution and a strong multi-factor authentication solution that uses cryptography to replace both usernames and passwords. 
Encryption|Xapo provides a highly secure Bitcoin wallet and vault with support for real cold storage through cutting edge technology, as well as debit card services (coming soon). 
Network Security|XM Cyber provides the first fully automated APT Simulation Platform to continuously expose all attack vectors and prioritizes remediation. 
Managed Security Services|XO Communications is a global telecommunications services provider that offers a range of managed security services. 
Digital Forensics|X-Ways provides a set of digital forensic tools for the recovery and analysis of relevant data in support of investigations. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing, Incident Response|Xyone provides a range of security consulting including penetration testing, compliance, incident response, and training. 
Big Data Security, Security Analytics|Yaana provides intelligent solutions, Big Data retention, analytics, and security compliance. 
Security Consulting, Penetration Testing|Yarix provides a range of security consulting services including penetration testing, forensic analysis, and audit. 
Security Analytics, Risk based Access Controls, Compliance,|Yaxa provides real time breach protection from user-driven threat behaviors such as hackers using stolen or hijacked accounts, malicious insiders abusing their priveleges, and employees or contractors violating access policies. 
Brand Protection|Your Internet Defender provides a service for managing personal and corporate inline reputation from smears and unfair, negative press. 
Two-Factor Authentication|Yubico provides an open-source, USB authentication solution for platforms. 
Data Leakage Prevention|Zecurion provides a range of data leakage solutions to reduce the risk of accidental or intentional sharing of confidential information. 
DDOS Security, Web Application Firewall|Zenedge provides a range of Web security solutions including DDOS protection and Web application firewall. 
VPN/Secure Access|ZenMate provides a privacy and security-enhancing browser VPN product. 
Cloud Security|Zentera Systems provides an overlay virtual layer network that connects the enterprise to cloud securely. 
Bug Bounty Support|Zerodium pays premium rewards to researchers who identify high consequence zero day vulnerabilities. 
Brand Protection, Social Media Security|ZeroFOX offers social media and digital security solutions to protect organizations across social, mobile, web and collaboration platforms. 
Cloud Security|Zerto provides disaster recovery, business continuity, and protection for cloud infrastructure using hypervisor-level virtual replication. 
Next-Generation Encryption and Data Protection|Zettaset’s XCrypt™ Data Encryption Platform delivers proven protection for NoSQL, SQL, Object, and Hadoop data stores…in the cloud and on-premises. XCrypt encryption solutions are designed and optimized for fast performance and unlimited scalability in today’s complex and demanding distributed- computing environments. 
Endpoint Security|Ziften provides software that collects data from enterprise endpoint devices and supports analysis into abnormalities and machine behavior. 
Mobile Security|Zimperium provides enterprise mobile security including threat management and device protection. 
Industrial Control System/Internet of Things Security|ZingBox is a U.S.-based company that provides security for Internet of Things infrastructure. 
Email Security, Data Encryption, Data Leakage Prevention|ZixCorp provides a range of email encryption, BYOD, and DLP solutions for enterprise customers. 
Information Assurance|Zeichner Risk Analytics (ZRA) provides expert cyber security/information assurance consultation services including program support and risk management. 
Security Recruiting|ZRG Partners is a global executive search and human capital management firm with a practice in cyber security and defense/intelligence. 
Web Security, Cloud Security, Network Monitoring|Zscaler provides a SaaS security solution for enterprise customers. The company refers to its service as a “direct to cloud network” (DCN) scheme for virtual proxy security. 
